As I sat in my car, eating a cheeseburger and fries, I suddenly found it difficult to fathom the chain of events that had led me to this point, since the project that became so complex and multifaceted had once seemed so simple and straightforward.
I had set out to write a book about food.
I had long known that human beings, due to their omnivorous nature, have a complicated relationship with food.
For a cow, the decision of what to have for lunch is a simple one: if it's grass, it must be good to eat.
But for humans (and other omnivores), an enormous amount of time and effort must be expended on deciding exactly what to eat.
People have always relied on their powers of cognition and memory to steer them away from foods that are harmful or unpleasant, and toward foods that are nourishing and enjoyable.
In fact, some anthropologists theorize that the reason humans originally developed such large and complex brains was to help solve the riddle of what to have for lunch.
I decided that pondering this seemingly simple question would be the best way to being my inquiring into our relationship with food.
My original plan was to follow the paths of several food chains, from beginning to end: from farm or ranch to dinner table.
Since American cuisine is so commonly associated with fast food, I started by attempting to trace the ingredients that make up a typical fast food meal, from their presumably pastoral points of origin to their final destination as a cheeseburger and fries, consumed while I drove down the freeway.
I was attracted to this particular plan for its variety and for its extremes.
In the same way that following a river from alpine peak to desert floor exposes the traveler to every conceivable climate, I assumed that racing these routes would afford me a glimpse of all the myriad sources of our food.
What I didn't realize was that following these paths would be more complex than I had ever imagined.
The complexity arose, at least in part, from the sheer magnitude of the task.
In retrospect, I should have known that racing the precise route of any single food item was about as realistic as following the route of a glass of water after it's been poured into a stream.
Eventually, I realized that the only way to surmount this difficulty was to follow the stream itself rather than what was floating in it: to follow "potatoes" rather than "this bag of potatoes."
Unfortunately, this took care of only part of my problem.
The greater difficulty arose not from the stream itself, but from all the tributaries, inlets, and channels that crisscrossed or diverged from my chosen path.
I had believed that the particular stream I was following existed in splendid isolation, while in reality it was hopelessly intertwined with all sorts of other streams, in such a way that it was often impossible to tell where one left off and another began.
There was no way to consider the stream labeled "corn" for example, without taking into account the stream that was "industrial fertilizer production."
That stream in turn, was impossible to contemplate without a side trip down the tributary named "fossil fuels" and so on.
It didn't take many of these side trips to feel as if I'd lost sight of my original goal.
Looking back, I think I must have known all along that my plan wouldn't survive the journey in its original form.
Certainly, I always had an inkling that the production of food was just a small part of a much greater ecosystem, even if I hadn't consciously understood that pursuing the stream that represented agriculture would lead me onto so many other related pathways.
In the end, I cam to realize that no part of an ecosystem can be isolated and studied without consider the broad framework that supports it.
###
The word "splendid" (Line 19) most nearly means
perplexing
optimistic
accessible
attractive
absolute
4

