“Lucy Honeychurch has no faults,” said Cecil, with grave sincerity.
“I quite agree.
At present she has none.”
“At present?”
“I’m not cynical.
I’m only thinking of my pet theory about Miss Honeychurch.
Does it seem reasonable that she should play piano so wonderfully, and live so quietly?
I suspect that someday she shall be wonderful in both.
The water-tight compartments in her will break down, and music and life will mingle.
Then we shall have her heroically good, heroically bad—too heroic, perhaps, to be good or bad.”
Cecil found his companion interesting.
“And at present you think her not wonderful as far as life goes?”
“Well, I must say I’ve only seen her at Tunbridge Wells, where she was not wonderful, and at Florence.
She wasn’t wonderful in Florence either, but I kept on expecting that she would be.”
“In what way?”
Conversation had become agreeable to them, and they were pacing up and down the terrace.
“I could as easily tell you what tune she’ll play next.
There was simply the sense that she found wings and meant to use them.
I can show you a beautiful picture in my diary.
Miss Honeychurch as a kite, Miss Bartlett holding the string.
Picture number two: the string breaks.”
The sketch was in his diary, but it had been made afterwards, when he viewed things artistically.
At the time he had given surreptitious tugs to the string himself.
“But the string never broke?”
“No.
I mightn’t have seen Miss Honeychurch rise, but I should certainly have heard Miss Bartlett fall.”
“It has broken now,” said the young man in low, vibrating tones.
Immediately he realized that of all the conceited, ludicrous, contemptible ways of announcing an engagement this was the worst.
He cursed his love of metaphor; had he suggested that he was a star and that Lucy was soaring up to reach him?
“Broken? What do you mean?”
“I meant,” Cecil said stiffly, “that she is going to marry me.”
The clergyman was conscious of some bitter disappointment which he could not keep out of his voice.
“I am sorry; I must apologize.
I had no idea you were intimate with her, or I should never have talked
in this flippant, superficial way.
You ought to have stopped me.”
And down in the garden he saw Lucy herself; yes, he was disappointed.
Cecil, who naturally preferred congratulations to apologies, drew down the corner of his mouth.
Was this the reaction his action would get from the whole world?
Of course, he despised the world as a whole; every thoughtful man should; it is almost a test of refinement.
“I’m sorry I have given you a shock,” he said dryly.
“I fear that Lucy’s choice does not meet with your approval.” 
###
In line 18, “sense” most nearly means
definition
intelligence
plausibility
consensus
impression 
4
