Although posed in the most casual of circumstances, the Fermi Paradox has reverberated through the decades and has at times threatened to destroy the credibility of those scientists seriously engaged in the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) research program.
One possible answer to Fermi’s question (“If there are extraterrestrials, where are they?”) is that extraterrestrials have in fact often visited Earth, and continue to do so.
This is the answer of those who believe in the existence of unidentified flying objects, or UFO’s.
But few scientists, even those engaged in SETI, take the UFO claims
seriously.
“You won’t find anyone around here who believes in UFO’s,” says Frank Drake, a well-known SETI scientist.
If one discounts the UFO claims, yet still believes that there are many technological civilizations in the galaxy, why have they not visited us?
Drake’s answer is straightforward: “High-speed interstellar travel is so demanding of resources and so hazardous that intelligent civilizations don’t attempt it.”
And why should they attempt it, when radio communication can supply all
the information they might want?
At first glance, Drake’s argument seems very persuasive.
The distances between stars are truly immense.
To get from Earth to the nearest star and back, traveling at 99 percent of the speed of light, would take 8 years.
And SETI researchers have shown that, to accelerate a spacecraft to such a speed, to bring it to a stop, and to repeat the process in the reverse direction, would take almost unimaginable amounts of energy.
Astronomer Ben Zuckerman challenges Drake’s notion that technological beings would be satisfied with radio communication.
“Drake’s implicit assumption is that the only thing we’re going to care about is intelligent life.
But what if we have an interest in simpler life-forms?
If you turn the picture around and you have some advanced extraterrestrials looking at the Earth, until the last hundred years there was no evidence of intelligent life but for billions of years before that they could have deduced that this was a very unusual world and that there were probably living creatures on it.
They would have had billions of years to come investigate.”
Zuckerman contends that the reason extraterrestrials haven’t visited us is that so few exist. 
###
In line 7, “claims” most nearly means
demands
assertions
rights
territories
compensations 
1
