Georgia was to be married.
It was the week before Christmas, and on the last day of the year she would become Mrs. Joseph Tank.
She had told Joe that if they were to be married at all they might as well get it over with this year, and still there was no need of being
married any earlier in the year than was necessary.
She assured him that she married him simply because she was tired of having paper bags waved before her eyes everywhere she went and she thought if she were once officially associated with him people would not flaunt his idiosyncrasies at her that way.
And then Ernestine, her best friend, approved of getting married, and Ernestine’s ideas were usually good.
To all of which Joe responded that she certainly had a splendid head to figure it out that way.
Joe said that to his mind reasons for doing things weren’t very important anyhow; it was doing them that counted.
Yesterday had been her last day on the paper.
She had felt queer about that thing of taking her last assignment, though it was hard to reach just the proper state, for the last story related to pork-packers, and pork-packing is not a setting favorable to sentimental regrets.
It was just like the newspaper business not even to allow one a little sentimental harrowing over one’s exodus from it.
But the time for gentle melancholy came later on when she was sorting her things at her desk just before leaving, and was wondering what girl would have that old desk—if they cared to risk another girl, and whether the other poor girl would slave through the years she should have been frivolous, only to have some man step in at the end and induce her to surrender the things she had gained through sacrifice and toil.
As she wrote a final letter on her typewriter—she did hate letting the old machine go—Georgia did considerable philosophizing about the irony of working for things only to the end of giving them up.
She had waded through snowdrifts and been drenched in pouring rains, she had been frozen with the cold and prostrated with the heat, she had
been blown about by Chicago wind until it was strange there was any of her left in one piece, she had had front doors—yes, and back doors too—slammed in her face, she had been the butt of the alleged wit of menials and hirelings, she had been patronized by vapid women as the poor girl who must make her living some way, she had been roasted by—but never mind—she had had a beat* or two!
And now she was to wind it all up by marrying Joseph Tank, who had made a great deal of money out of the manufacture of paper bags.
This from her—who had always believed she would end her days in New York, or perhaps write a realistic novel exposing some mighty evil! 
###
In line 12, “poor” most nearly means
pitiable
indigent
inferior
humble
petty
0
