Inside, we sat on wonderfully comfortable seats that were tilted back so that you lay in a sort of a hammock, attention directed to the bowl of the ceiling, which soon turned dark blue, with a faint rim of light around the edge.
There was some splendid, commanding music.
The adults all around were shushing the children, trying to make them stop crackling their potato chip bags.
Then a man’s voice, an eloquent professional voice, began to speak slowly, out of the walls.
The voice reminded me a little of the way radio announcers used to introduce a piece of classical music or describe the progress of the Royal Family to Westminster Abbey on one of their royal occasions.
There was a faint echo-chamber effect.
The dark ceiling was filled with stars.
They came out not all at once but one after another, the way stars really do come out at night, though more quickly.
The Milky Way galaxy appeared, was moving closer; stars swam into brilliance and kept on going, disappearing beyond the edges of the sky-screen or behind my head.
While the flow of light continued, the voice presented the stunning facts.
From a few light-years away, it announced, the Sun appears as a bright star, and the planets are not visible.
From a few dozen light-years away, the Sun is not visible, either, to the naked eye.
And that distance—a few dozen light-years—is only about a thousandth part of the distance from the Sun to the center of our galaxy, one galaxy, which itself contains about two hundred billion stars.
And is, in turn, one of millions, perhaps billions, of galaxies.
Innumerable repetitions, innumerable variations.
All this rolled past my head, too, like balls of lightning.
Now realism was abandoned, for familiar artifice.
A model of the solar system was spinning away in its elegant style.
A bright bug took off from the Earth, heading for Jupiter.
I set my dodging and shrinking mind sternly to recording facts.
The mass of Jupiter two and a half times that of all the other planets put together.
The Great Red Spot.
The thirteen moons.
Past Jupiter, a glance at the eccentric orbit of Pluto, the icy rings of Saturn.
Back to Earth and moving in to hot and dazzling Venus.
Atmospheric pressure ninety times ours.
Moonless Mercury rotating three times while circling the Sun twice; an odd arrangement, not as satisfying as what they used to tell us—that it rotated once as it circled the Sun.
No perpetual darkness after all.
Why did they give out such confident information, only to announce later that it was quite wrong?
Finally, the picture already familiar from magazines: the red soil of Mars, the blooming pink sky.
When the show was over I sat in my seat while children clambered over me, making no comments on anything they had just seen or heard.
They were pestering their keepers for eatables and further entertainments.
An effort had been made to get their attention, to take it away from canned drinks and potato chips and fix it on various knowns and unknowns and horrible immensities, and it seemed to have failed.
A good thing, too, I thought.
Children have a natural immunity, most of them, and it shouldn’t be tampered with.
As for the adults who would deplore it, the ones who promoted this show, weren’t they immune themselves to the extent that they could put in the echo-chamber effects, the music, the solemnity, simulating the awe that they supposed they ought to feel?
Awe—what was that supposed to be?
A fit of the shivers when you looked out the window?
Once you knew what it was, you wouldn’t be courting it.
###
In line 5, “progress” most nearly means
evolution
improvement
prosperity
promotion
advance 
4
###
In line 33, “fix” most nearly means
focus
prepare
repair
decide
influence 
0
