Generations of science-fiction movies have conditioned us to consider bug-eyed monsters, large-brained intellectual humanoids, and other rather sophisticated extraterrestrial creatures as typical examples of life outside Earth.
The reality, however, is that finding any kind of life at all, even something as simple as bacteria, would be one of the most exciting discoveries ever made.
The consensus within the scientific community seems to be that we eventually will find not only life in other parts of the galaxy but also intelligent and technologically advanced life.
I have to say that I disagree.
While I believe we will find other forms of life in other solar systems (if not in our own), I also feel it is extremely unlikely that a large number of advanced technological civilizations are out there, waiting to be discovered.
The most succinct support for my view comes from Nobel laureate physicist Enrico Fermi, the man who ran the first nuclear reaction ever controlled by human beings.
Confronted at a 1950 luncheon with scientific arguments for the ubiquity of technologically advanced civilizations, he supposedly said, “So where is everybody?”
This so-called Fermi Paradox embodies a simple logic.
Human beings have had modern science only a few hundred years, and already we have moved into space.
It is not hard to imagine that in a few hundred more years we will be a starfaring people, colonizing other systems.
Fermi’s argument maintains that it is extremely unlikely that many other civilizations discovered science at exactly the same time we did.
Had they acquired science even a thousand years earlier than we, they now could be so much more advanced that they would already be colonizing our solar system.
If, on the other hand, they are a thousand years behind us, we will likely arrive at their home planet before they even begin sending us radio signals.
Technological advances build upon each other, increasing technological
abilities faster than most people anticipate.
Imagine, for example, how astounded even a great seventeenth-century scientist like Isaac Newton would be by our current global communication system, were he alive today.
Where are those highly developed extraterrestrial civilizations so dear
to the hearts of science-fiction writers?
Their existence is far from a foregone conclusion. 
###
In line 6, “ran” most nearly means
fled
accumulated
traversed
managed
incurred 
3
