Over the course of millions of years, humans throughout the world have built up a knowledge of their local natural environment so extensive that not even professional biologists can hope to capture more than a small fraction of it, and other members of urban and industrialized societies can scarcely imagine it.
At the end of the twenty-four days that I spent with the Ketengban people of New Guinea, I felt like a narrow-minded boor because I had so often nudged the subject back to birds when they began to talk of anything else.
Even for very rare bird species, such as New Guinea’s leaden honeyeater and garnet robin, the Ketengbans rattled off the altitudes at which the birds lived, the other species with which they associated, the height above the ground at which they foraged, their diet, adult call, juvenile call, seasonal movements, and so on.
Only by cutting short the Ketengbans’ attempts to share with me their equally detailed knowledge of local plant, rat, and frog species could I record even fragments of their knowledge of birds in twenty-four days.
Traditionally, the Ketengbans acquired this knowledge by spending much of their time in the forest, from childhood on.
When I asked my guide, Robert Uropka, how, lacking binoculars and the sight of one eye, he had come to know so much about a tiny, dullplumed warbler species that lives in the treetops, he told me that as children he and his playmates used to climb trees, build blinds in the canopy, and observe and hunt up there.
But all that is changing, he explained, as he pointed to his eight-year-old son.
Children go to school now, and only at vacation times can they live in the forest.
The results, as I have seen elsewhere in New Guinea, are adult New Guineans who know scarcely more about birds than do most American city dwellers.
Compounding this problem, education throughout Indonesian New Guinea is in the Indonesian national language, not in Ketengban and the 300 other indigenous languages.
Radio, TV, newspapers, commerce, and government also use the Indonesian national language.
While the reasoning behind such decisions is, of course, understandable, the outcome is that all but 200 of the modern world’s 6,000 languages are likely to be extinct or moribund by the end of the next century.
As humanity’s linguistic heritage disintegrates, much of our traditional, mostly unrecorded knowledge base vanishes with it.
The analogy that occurs to me is the final destruction, in 391 A.D., of the largest library of the ancient world, at Alexandria.
The library housed all the literature of Greece, plus much literature of other cultures, most of which, as a result of that library’s burning, was lost to later generations.
The ongoing loss today that draws most public attention is the loss of biodiversity; that is, the loss of variety in nature.
In that loss, nature is viewed as the victim, humans as the villains.
But there is also a parallel loss in which humans are both victims and unwitting villains.
Not only are species going extinct, but so is much of our information about those species that survive.
In the future, no children will grow up in the forest, where they could receive or rediscover that knowledge.
Certainly, professional biologists don’t have the necessary time—I count myself lucky if I can spend one month every year or two in New Guinea.
It is as if we are burning most of our books, while the languages of those books that remain become as lost to us as the texts written 3,000 years ago in ancient Crete in what is the still-undecipherable ancient Greek script.
###
In line 1, “capture” most nearly means
control
grab
acquire
win
attract
2
###
In line 10, “compounding” most nearly means
adjusting to
adding to
combining
computing
comprising
1
