Surprisingly, there are old comic book fans, a small army of them: adults wearing school ties and tweeds, teaching in universities, writing ad copy, writing for chic magazines, writing novels -- who continue to be addicts, who save old comic books, buy them, trade them, who publish mimeographed "fanzines," strange little publications deifying what is looked back on as "the golden age of comic books". Ruined by growing up.
The charges against comic books in the 1950's -- that they were participating factors in juvenile delinquency, that they were, in general, a corrupting influence, glorifying crime and depravity -- can only, in all fairness, be answered: "But of course. Why else read them?"
Comic books, first of all, are junk.
To accuse them of being what they are is to make no accusation at all: there is no such thing as uncorrupt junk or moral junk or educational junk -- though attempts at the latter have, from time to time, been foisted upon us.
But education is not the purpose of junk (which is one reason why half-hearted attempts to bring reality or literature to comic books invariably look embarrassing.)
Junk is there to entertain on the basest, most compromised of levels.
It finds the lowest common denominator and proceeds from there.
A good many readers, when challenged, will say defiantly: "I know it's junk but I like it."
Which is the whole point about junk.
It is there to be nothing else but liked.
Junk is a second-class citizen of the arts, a status of which we and it are constantly aware.
There are certain privileges inherent in second-class citizenship.
Irresponsibility is one.
Not being taken seriously is another.
Junk can get away with doing or saying anything because, by its very appearance, it is already in disgrace.
What critics of comic books dismiss is the more positive side of junk, their underground antisocial influence.
Children are bombarded with hard work, labeled education.
They rise at the same time or earlier than their parents, start work without office chatter, go till noon without coffee breaks, have waxed milk for lunch, then back at the desk until three o'clock.
And always at someone else's convenience.
It should come as no surprise, then, that within this shifting hodgepodge of external pressures, children, simply to stay sane, must go underground.
Have a place to hide where they cannot be got at by grownups.
A relief zone.
And the basic sustenance for this relieve was, in my day, comic books.
With them we were able to roam free, disguised in costume, committing the greatest of feats -- and the worst of sins.
And, in every instance, getting away with them.
For a little while, at least, it was our show.
For a little while, at least, we were the bosses.
Psychically renewed, we could then return aboveground and put up with another couple of days of victimization.
###
In line 6, "compromised" most nearly means
settled
endangered
combined
reconciled
degraded
4