Hawaiian quilts, such as those created by Marthe Marques and Helen Friend, reflect an eclectic blend of early American quilt making, Hawaiian tradition, island imagery, spiritual influences, current events, and modern vision.
Helen Friend, a recognized contemporary Hawaiian artist, produces quilted artworks inspired by nature’s power, Hawaii’s natural environment, current events, and historic textiles.
Her quilt titled I ka Ho’okumuana (In the Beginning) depicts an aerial view of an erupting volcano constructed of appliqued red flames set against a black background fabric.
This quilt embraces both the past and the future; it clearly falls within the provenance of a traditional Hawaiian quilt, and at the same time it challenges the boundaries of that definition.
While many historians claim that New England Missionaries brought quilting to the islands in 1820, it has been reported that Hawaiian women fashioned decorative bed coverings, called kapa moe, long before the missionaries’ arrival.
Kapa moe were constructed from multiple layers of tapa, a paper-like fabric crafted from mulberry bark.
The top layer of tapa was often dyed and decorated with beautiful geometric designs.
The layers, each one comprised of a large piece of fabric, were stitched together, possibly to provide additional resilience.
With the arrival of the missionaries, Hawaiian quilters were introduced to American materials, quilting methods and designs.
The missionaries brought metal needles, cotton fabrics, and cotton thread to Hawaii.
In addition, they taught the native women to work with both patchwork and appliqued quilting.
In patchwork quilting, designs on the quilt’s top layer are created by piercing small bits of fabric together to form patterns, then overstitched with contrasting designs when the layers of the quilt are united.
With appliqued quilts, the quilt’s top layer is decorated with pieces of fabric cut to form images and designs.
While many patchwork quilts incorporate small geometric shapes in various colors aligned to form larger geometric shapes, appliqued quilting allows quilters to express more natural shapes and images.
###
The word “resilience” (line 8) most nearly means
impermanence
flexibility
lightheartedness
frailty
robustness
4
###
The word “piercing” (line 12) most nearly means
sewing
cutting up
creating
breaking
replacing
0
