The cheetah may be a gorgeous, sleek sports car among mammals, able to sprint at speeds approaching Seventy miles an hour, yet it has not been able to run away from its many miseries.
Once the cat ranged throughout the African continent, the Near East, and into southern India; now it is extinct almost everywhere but in scattered patches of sub-Saharan Africa, Farmers in Iambi shoot cheetahs as Vermin.
On reserves, where cheetahs are often forced into unnatural proximity with other predators, they are at the bottom of the meat eaters' grim hierarchy; lions will go out of their way to destroy cheetah cubs, while hyenas, leopards, and even vultures can easily chase away a cheetah from its hard-caught prey.
To make the magnificent cats story more poignant still, many scientists have concluded that the species is severely inbred, the result of a disastrous population crash thousands of years ago from which the poor animals have hardly had a chance to recover.
Studies of cheetah chromosomes show a surprising Jack of genetic diversity from one individual to the next, and as a result the cheetah is widely portrayed as sitting under an evolutionary guillotine, the population so monochromatic that, in theory, a powerful epidemic could destroy many if not all of the approximately fifteen thousand cheetahs that currently exist in the wilderness.
Some zoos have complained that cheetahs are infertile, and they attribute the problem to the cheetahs bleak genetic makeup, calling into question the long-term prognosis even for cats living in the pampered confines of a park.
Now some maverick biologists argue that this widely held notion of the inbred cheetah may be wrong, an artifact of test tube manipulations with little relevance to the cats workaday world.
They insist that, far from displaying the negative effects of lethargy and feebleness seen in other animals known to be genetically homogeneous, cheetahs are in many ways quite robust.
The significance of the debate extends far beyond the cat itself.
Scientists are seeking to calculate the odds that any number of endangered or threatened species are likely to survive into the twenty-first century, and among the in any questions they ask is how much genetic diversity a creature requires if it is to rebound from the brink of extinction.
Inbreeding is thought to be harmful to a species for two reasons: first, it allows hazardous recessive traits to come to the fore, resulting in physical problems and, in some cases, infertility; and second, it leads to a genetically uniform population without the diversity to resist epidemics and environmental changes.
But the scientists who resist the inbred cheetah dogma point out that many zoo cats bear healthy cubs, are perfectly fertile and vigorous, and have great variation in their immune systems.
While the cheetah may look genetically tenuous when its DNA is appraised, by such real life measurements as litter size, cub health, and immune response, the cheetah is perfectly fit for the millennium.
The work of these scientists calls into question the validity of a strictly molecular approach to the sometimes murky Science of species preservation, and it strongly suggests that Scientists do not yet understand why certain genetic patterns detected in laboratory tests translate into the genuine strengths and weaknesses of a wild animal.
The work also indicates that zoos having trouble propagating cheetahs in captivity perhaps should not blame the animals DNA, but rather their own ineptitude at the science of animal breeding.
In the final analysis, the cheetahs long-term future very likely rests not on genetic research, but on old-fashioned remedies like preserving its remaining habitat and enlisting the help of those who live alongside it.
In Namibia, where the cheetah does not have to compete with many other carnivores, as it does elsewhere in Africa, the feline fares reasonably well, and its biggest problem is ranchers who shoot it in the belief that the cat threatens their livestock.
Biologists in Namibia are seeking to convince the cattle owners that cheetahs in fact kill very few livestock animals, and to establish a compensatory program should a calf occasionally be lost.
With its sizeable free-ranging population now confined to Namibia, the cheetah is being pitched as a uniquely Namibian cat and thus a source of national pride.
More than an ideal genetic profile, the cheetah needs a bit of panting room and all the public relations its noble bearing can buy.
###
In line 4, "crash" most nearly means
accident
intensity
decline
noise
extinction
2
###
In line 20, "bearing" most nearly means
relationship or interconnection
the power of producing offspring
something that supports weight
demeanor or presence
awareness of a situation
3