During the late 1940s and early 1950s, civil rights activists in Washington waged a battle against racial
discrimination in the city that had always been viewed as a symbol of our democracy. Their story reveals the
deep connections between social scientists, activists, an emerging web of new and old civil rights
organizations, and the nation’s liberal elite at the mid-twentieth century. The story also […] shows the
important role of symbolism in the attack on Jim Crow [during the Civil Rights Movement].
Segregation was a powerful institution in postwar DC, just as it was in the rest of the South, but the city’s racerelations
history was complex and constantly changing. The city boasted a large and influential free black
population during the antebellum era. After the Civil War, the relatively benign rule of the federal government
made DC a mecca for America’s black elite. The men and women who belonged to this elite group created
numerous significant institutions to promote their interests, including Howard University. In the early
twentieth century, however, DC blacks, like those across the nation, witnessed the erection of many barriers
to economic and social progress. During the Taft and Wilson administrations, Jim Crow regulations increasingly
restricted the movements and opportunities of the capital’s black citizens, and DC’s black population became
the focal point of actions taken by segregationists in Congress.
African Americans fought these efforts in a variety of ways and with increasing effort. During the 1930s, DC
was a leader in the “Don’t Buy Where You Can’t Work” movement, and blacks aggressively protested
discrimination in employment. While progress was inconsistent, the New Deal provided an increase in
employment opportunities in the federal government to both working-class people and blacks, securing
symbolic victories against Jim Crow. During World War II, employment shortages brought significant economic
gains to African Americans and spurred them to demand greater political rights.
After World War II, activists stepped up their attacks on Jim Crow in DC. […]One organization that played a
crucial role in the fight against racial prejudice was the American Council on Race Relations. Founded in 1944
with the support of philanthropists Edwin Embree (of the Rosenwald Fund) and Marshall Field, and with the
participation of key civil rights leaders including Walter White, Mary McCleod Bethune, and Lester Granger,
the organization aimed “to bring about full democracy in race relations,” through the “discovery of
fundamental knowledge” about racial problems. University of Chicago sociologist Louis Wirth and African
American economist (and future cabinet secretary) Robert C. Weaver led the organization as it sought to
promote the scholarly study of racial issues, to develop materials for use by government and private
organizations, and to assist local communities in organizing programs of racial cooperation.
One of the council’s first projects focused on segregation in Washington, DC. Because of “the symbolic
significance of the Nation’s Capital as the repository of the American Creed,” Embree argued that challenging
segregation in Washington could establish a precedent for fighting the institution across the country. In 1946,
Embree and Weaver (a DC native) organized the National Committee on Segregation in the Nation’s Capital,
gathering support from over one hundred of the nation’s leaders. Over the next two years, Weaver oversaw
the preparation of a major study of the capital’s race relations, which he intended to use to promote legal and
social reform in the city.
[…]
In 1948, Embree, Wirth, and Weaver released the committee’s 91-page report. Entitled “Segregation in
Washington,” it began by focusing on the global implications of discrimination in the District. “Few
Americans,” it argued, “appreciate what a shock Washington can be to visitors from abroad.” As evidence, the
report reproduced a letter from a Danish visitor, who noted that “Washington today, despite its great outward
beauty, is not a good ‘salesman’ for your kind of democracy.”
The report then examined several aspects of segregation in the city, describing the almost complete exclusion
of blacks by eating establishments in the downtown area and the restrictions imposed on black customers in
commercial operations. It also described the vise-like grip that housing discrimination placed on black
residents. Excluded from newly developed areas in the outlying sections of DC, blacks were forced to find
accommodations in the declining and overcrowded interior. In addition, the report detailed the continuing
restrictions on employment despite the explosion of civil service jobs. Although new agencies like the Office of
Price Administration proved that integrated offices could function efficiently, many federal agencies—the
worst example was the State Department—still practiced a rigid discrimination that limited blacks to the
lowest-ranking positions.
The final section of the report focused on education and recreation in DC. “Every September,” the report
stated, “the Superintendent of Schools makes two speeches. They are identical in content, but one is made to
Negro teachers and the other to white teachers.” This separation was enforced throughout all parts of the
public school system. Moreover, separate did not mean equal in the District’s schools, as Negro schools
received far less funding and had less qualified teachers and older facilities than their white counterparts.
Segregation also applied to after-school programs, run by the recreation department, where the system was
so rigidly imposed that the city even named two annual champions (one white, one black) in marbles
tournaments.
The report concluded with a call to action: “For more than half a century, DC had been building ghettoes of
mind, body and spirit. They are ghettoes that cramp the soul of the nation. In the Nation’s Capital, we must
mean what we say, and give people of all races and colors an equal chance to life, liberty and the pursuit of
happiness.”
The report received significant national and local attention. […]The report and the increasing attention it
brought to discrimination in DC resulted in significant and immediate reforms. Just days after the report’s release, the Civilian Aeronautics Administration declared that it would bar any discrimination at facilities of
the National Airport (now Ronald Reagan Airport). J.A. Krug, the Secretary of the Interior Department, which
was negotiating to turn over operation of several District facilities to the local recreation department, declared
that his department would not complete the transfer until the recreation department eliminated its
requirement of racial segregation in its facilities.
The most interesting outcome of the report was an effort to resuscitate the District’s nineteenth-century
“lost” discrimination laws. During their research, committee members discovered that in 1872 and 1873, the
Council of the District of Columbia had passed laws giving blacks equal rights in all places of public
accommodation, including restaurants and hotels. These laws had never been repealed, but had been
surreptitiously removed from the DC code sometime in the early 1900s. To push the local government to
acknowledge the validity of the laws, a group of District activists formed the Coordinating Committee for the
Enforcement of DC Anti-Discrimination Laws (CCEAD). Led by Mary Church Terrell, an 88-year-old African
American, who was virtually an institution in the District and was the scion of one of its most famous families,
the group directed a three-prong attack on public segregation, which consisted of lobbying the DC
government, initiating legal action to secure the enforcement of the statutes, and protesting at those
commercial facilities that refused to integrate.
After some pressure, the commissioners who ran the city agreed to enforce the laws, partly as a matter of civil
rights, but in large part because they viewed the effort as an important precedent for the home-rule
independence they had lobbied Congress to grant the local government. Activists initiated a test case in which
Terrell, along with two other African Americans and one white person, attempted to get service at
Thompson’s Restaurant, a downtown business. When they were refused, they immediately filed charges in the
DC corporation counsel’s office. In July 1950, a DC district judge dismissed the charges, declaring the
antidiscrimination laws “repealed by implication.” Later that year, a local appellate court reversed the decision
and the restaurant asked the United States Court of Appeals to intervene.
[…]
While the courts were considering the matter, CCEAD organized protests at several downtown stores to push
them to integrate. During 1950 and 1951, activists secured the signatures of 4,000 DC residents, who pledged
not to patronize Woolworth’s, Hecht’s, Kresge’s, Murphy’s, and other major department stores that refused to
serve blacks at their lunch counters. Within the year, each of these establishments capitulated to the pressure
and agreed to provide full services to African American customers.
Activists also won in court, after a long battle. In 1952, a divided federal bench declared the antidiscrimination
laws invalid. Ignoring the content of the laws, the five judges in the majority focused on the question of the
government’s authority to pass and enforce them. However, in an eight-to-zero decision, the US Supreme
Court reversed, declaring that the laws had been authorized by the District’s home-rule powers when adopted
and that they remained valid. The decision was a major victory for local activists, providing a rallying point to attack segregated institutions across the city, and serving as a harbinger of other civil rights battles that would
take place in the near future.
The efforts of national and local civil rights activists to draw attention to the practice of segregation in the
District of Columbia provided a powerful framework for mounting an attack on school segregation. By the
early 1950s, segregation in the District was a national disgrace, and one that could not be met with arguments
of states’ rights. The efforts of local and national activists reveal the multifaceted approach of civil rights
lawyers, activists, and liberal institutions to promote civil rights in the postwar years. By highlighting the
corrosive effect of segregation on the nation’s capital, a vital symbol of democracy, activists were able to
change the terms of debate and, therefore, the law.
