"We the people, in order to form a more perfect union."  
Two hundred and twenty one years ago, in a hall that still stands across the street, a group of men gathered
and, with these simple words, launched America's improbable experiment in democracy. Farmers and
scholars; statesmen and patriots who had traveled across an ocean to escape tyranny and persecution finally
made real their declaration of independence at a Philadelphia convention that lasted through the spring of
1787.  
[…]  
[This Constitution] had at its very core the ideal of equal citizenship under the law; a Constitution that
promised its people liberty, and justice, and a union that could be and should be perfected over time.  
And yet words on a parchment would not be enough to deliver slaves from bondage, or provide men and
women of every color and creed their full rights and obligations as citizens of the United States. What would
be needed were Americans in successive generations who were willing to do their part—through protests and
struggle, on the streets and in the courts, through a civil war and civil disobedience and always at great risk—
to narrow that gap between the promise of our ideals and the reality of their time.  
This was one of the tasks we set forth at the beginning of this campaign—to continue the long march of those
who came before us, a march for a more just, more equal, more free, more caring and more prosperous
America. I chose to run for the presidency at this moment in history because I believe deeply that we cannot
solve the challenges of our time unless we solve them together—unless we perfect our union by
understanding that we may have different stories, but we hold common hopes; that we may not look the
same and we may not have come from the same place, but we all want to move in the same direction—
towards a better future for our children and our grandchildren.  
[…]
Throughout the first year of this campaign, against all predictions to the contrary, we saw how hungry the
American people were for this message of unity. Despite the temptation to view my candidacy through a
purely racial lens, we won commanding victories in states with some of the whitest populations in the country.
In South Carolina, where the Confederate Flag still flies, we built a powerful coalition of African Americans and
white Americans.  
This is not to say that race has not been an issue in the campaign. At various stages in the campaign, some
commentators have deemed me either "too black" or "not black enough." We saw racial tensions bubble to the surface during the week before the South Carolina primary. The press has scoured every exit poll for the
latest evidence of racial polarization, not just in terms of white and black, but black and brown as well.  
And yet, it has only been in the last couple of weeks that the discussion of race in this campaign has taken a
particularly divisive turn.  
On one end of the spectrum, we've heard the implication that my candidacy is somehow an exercise in
affirmative action; that it's based solely on the desire of wide‐eyed liberals to purchase racial reconciliation on
the cheap. On the other end, we've heard my former pastor, Reverend Jeremiah Wright, use incendiary
language to express views that have the potential not only to widen the racial divide, but views that denigrate
both the greatness and the goodness of our nation; that rightly offend white and black alike.  
[…]
[R]ace is an issue that I believe this nation cannot afford to ignore right now. We would be making the same
mistake that Reverend Wright made in his offending sermons about America—to simplify and stereotype and
amplify the negative to the point that it distorts reality.  
The fact is that the comments that have been made and the issues that have surfaced over the last few weeks
reflect the complexities of race in this country that we've never really worked through—a part of our union
that we have yet to perfect. And if we walk away now, if we simply retreat into our respective corners, we will
never be able to come together and solve challenges like health care, or education, or the need to find good
jobs for every American.  
Understanding this reality requires a reminder of how we arrived at this point. As William Faulkner once
wrote, "The past isn't dead and buried. In fact, it isn't even past." We do not need to recite here the history of
racial injustice in this country. But we do need to remind ourselves that so many of the disparities that exist in
the African‐American community today can be directly traced to inequalities passed on from an earlier
generation that suffered under the brutal legacy of slavery and Jim Crow.  
Segregated schools were, and are, inferior schools; we still haven't fixed them, fifty years after Brown v. Board
of Education, and the inferior education they provided, then and now, helps explain the pervasive
achievement gap between today's black and white students.  
Legalized discrimination—where blacks were prevented, often through violence, from owning property, or
loans were not granted to African‐American business owners, or black homeowners could not access FHA
mortgages, or blacks were excluded from unions, or the police force, or fire departments—meant that black
families could not amass any meaningful wealth to bequeath to future generations. That history helps explain
the wealth and income gap between black and white, and the concentrated pockets of poverty that persists in
so many of today's urban and rural communities.  This is the reality in which Reverend Wright and other African‐Americans of his generation grew up. They
came of age in the late fifties and early sixties, a time when segregation was still the law of the land and
opportunity was systematically constricted. What's remarkable is not how many failed in the face of
discrimination, but rather how many men and women overcame the odds; how many were able to make a
way out of no way for those like me who would come after them.  
But for all those who scratched and clawed their way to get a piece of the American Dream, there were many
who didn't make it—those who were ultimately defeated, in one way or another, by discrimination. That
legacy of defeat was passed on to future generations—those young men and increasingly young women who
we see standing on street corners or languishing in our prisons, without hope or prospects for the future. Even
for those blacks who did make it, questions of race, and racism, continue to define their worldview in
fundamental ways. For the men and women of Reverend Wright's generation, the memories of humiliation
and doubt and fear have not gone away; nor has the anger and the bitterness of those years. […]
That anger is not always productive; indeed, all too often it distracts attention from solving real problems; it
keeps us from squarely facing our own complicity in our condition, and prevents the African‐American
community from forging the alliances it needs to bring about real change. But the anger is real; it is powerful;
and to simply wish it away, to condemn it without understanding its roots, only serves to widen the chasm of
misunderstanding that exists between the races.  
In fact, a similar anger exists within segments of the white community. Most working‐ and middle‐class white
Americans don't feel that they have been particularly privileged by their race. Their experience is the
immigrant experience—as far as they're concerned, no one's handed them anything, they've built it from
scratch. They've worked hard all their lives[.] […] So when they are told to bus their children to a school across
town; when they hear that an African American is getting an advantage in landing a good job or a spot in a
good college because of an injustice that they themselves never committed; when they're told that their fears
about crime in urban neighborhoods are somehow prejudiced, resentment builds over time.  
[…]  
This is where we are right now. It's a racial stalemate we've been stuck in for years. Contrary to the claims of
some of my critics, black and white, I have never been so naïve as to believe that we can get beyond our racial
divisions in a single election cycle, or with a single candidacy—particularly a candidacy as imperfect as my
own.  
But I have asserted a firm conviction—a conviction rooted in my faith in God and my faith in the American
people—that working together we can move beyond some of our old racial wounds, and that in fact we have
no choice if we are to continue on the path of a more perfect union.  
For the African‐American community, that path means embracing the burdens of our past without becoming
victims of our past. It means continuing to insist on a full measure of justice in every aspect of American life.
But it also means binding our particular grievances—for better health care, and better schools, and better jobs—to the larger aspirations of all Americans—the white woman struggling to break the glass ceiling, the
white man who’s been laid off, the immigrant trying to feed his family. And it means taking full responsibility
for own lives—by demanding more from our fathers, and spending more time with our children, and reading
to them, and teaching them that while they may face challenges and discrimination in their own lives, they
must never succumb to despair or cynicism; they must always believe that they can write their own destiny.  
Ironically, this quintessentially American—and yes, conservative—notion of self‐help found frequent
expression in Reverend Wright's sermons. But what my former pastor too often failed to understand is that
embarking on a program of self‐help also requires a belief that society can change.  
The profound mistake of Reverend Wright's sermons is not that he spoke about racism in our society. It's that
he spoke as if our society was static; as if no progress has been made; as if this country—a country that has
made it possible for one of his own members to run for the highest office in the land and build a coalition of
white and black; Latino and Asian, rich and poor, young and old—is still irrevocably bound to a tragic past. But
what we know—what we have seen—is that America can change. That is the true genius of this nation. What
we have already achieved gives us hope—the audacity to hope—for what we can and must achieve tomorrow.  
In the white community, the path to a more perfect union means acknowledging that what ails the African‐
American community does not just exist in the minds of black people; that the legacy of discrimination—and
current incidents of discrimination, while less overt than in the past—are real and must be addressed. Not just
with words, but with deeds—by investing in our schools and our communities; by enforcing our civil rights
laws and ensuring fairness in our criminal justice system; by providing this generation with ladders of
opportunity that were unavailable for previous generations. It requires all Americans to realize that your
dreams do not have to come at the expense of my dreams; that investing in the health, welfare, and education
of black and brown and white children will ultimately help all of America prosper.  
In the end, then, what is called for is nothing more, and nothing less, than what all the world's great religions
demand—that we do unto others as we would have them do unto us. Let us be our brother's keeper, Scripture
tells us. Let us be our sister's keeper. Let us find that common stake we all have in one another, and let our
politics reflect that spirit as well.  
For we have a choice in this country. We can accept a politics that breeds division, and conflict, and cynicism.
We can tackle race only as spectacle—as we did in the OJ trial—or in the wake of tragedy, as we did in the
aftermath of Katrina—or as fodder for the nightly news. […]
That is one option. Or, at this moment, in this election, we can come together and say, "Not this time." This
time we want to talk about the crumbling schools that are stealing the future of black children and white
children and Asian children and Hispanic children and Native American children. This time we want to reject
the cynicism that tells us that these kids can't learn; that those kids who don't look like us are somebody else's
problem. The children of America are not those kids, they are our kids, and we will not let them fall behind in a
21st century economy. Not this time. This time we want to talk about how the lines in the Emergency Room are filled with whites and blacks and
Hispanics who do not have health care; who don't have the power on their own to overcome the special
interests in Washington, but who can take them on if we do it together.  
[…]
This time we want to talk about the men and women of every color and creed who serve together, and fight
together, and bleed together under the same proud flag. We want to talk about how to bring them home from
a war that never should've been authorized and never should've been waged, and we want to talk about how
we'll show our patriotism by caring for them, and their families, and giving them the benefits they have
earned.  
I would not be running for President if I didn't believe with all my heart that this is what the vast majority of
Americans want for this country. This union may never be perfect, but generation after generation has shown
that it can always be perfected. And today, whenever I find myself feeling doubtful or cynical about this
possibility, what gives me the most hope is the next generation—the young people whose attitudes and
beliefs and openness to change have already made history in this election.  
There is one story in particularly that I'd like to leave you with today[.] […]
There is a young, twenty‐three year old white woman named Ashley Baia who organized for our campaign in
Florence, South Carolina. She had been working to organize a mostly African‐American community since the
beginning of this campaign, and one day she was at a roundtable discussion where everyone went around
telling their story and why they were there.  
And Ashley said that when she was nine years old, her mother got cancer. And because she had to miss days
of work, she was let go and lost her health care. They had to file for bankruptcy, and that's when Ashley
decided that she had to do something to help her mom.  
She knew that food was one of their most expensive costs, and so Ashley convinced her mother that what she
really liked and really wanted to eat more than anything else was mustard and relish sandwiches. Because that
was the cheapest way to eat.  
She did this for a year until her mom got better, and she told everyone at the roundtable that the reason she
joined our campaign was so that she could help the millions of other children in the country who want and
need to help their parents too.  
[…]  
Anyway, Ashley finishes her story and then goes around the room and asks everyone else why they're
supporting the campaign. They all have different stories and reasons. Many bring up a specific issue. And
finally they come to this elderly black man who's been sitting there quietly the entire time. And Ashley asks
him why he's there. And he does not bring up a specific issue. He does not say health care or the economy. He does not say education or the war. He does not say that he was there because of Barack Obama. He simply
says to everyone in the room, "I am here because of Ashley."  
"I'm here because of Ashley." By itself, that single moment of recognition between that young white girl and
that old black man is not enough. It is not enough to give health care to the sick, or jobs to the jobless, or
education to our children.  
But it is where we start. It is where our union grows stronger. And as so many generations have come to
realize over the course of the two‐hundred and twenty one years since a band of patriots signed that
document in Philadelphia, that is where the perfection begins.
