A New York Times headline in January 2009 captured the essence of Barack Obama’s inauguration for many
Americans: “A Civil Rights Victory Party on the Mall.” An estimated 1.8 million people gathered to celebrate. Many
heroes of the black freedom struggle enjoyed places of honor. The inaugural committee set aside seats for a few
hundred surviving Tuskegee Airmen, members of a celebrated all‐black unit during World War II. The dignitaries
on the platform included ninety‐six‐year‐old Dorothy Height, who began her career as a civil rights activist in
Harlem during the Great Depression and who helped organize the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and
Freedom. Sitting nearby was John Lewis, a Georgia congressman and a former leader of the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee, who had been arrested during the 1960 lunch counter sit‐ins in Nashville and the 1961
Freedom Rides. Delivering the convocation was the Reverend Joseph Lowery, a founder of the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference and organizer of the 1965 march to Selma, Alabama, to demand voting rights.
Although Barack Obama was the first African American to be nominated for the presidency on a major party
ticket, he had generally shied away from racial controversy as he moved onto the national political scene. He did
not run as a “civil rights” candidate, and he generally distanced himself from what were perceived as “black
issues” on the campaign trail. Obama eschewed the fiery rhetoric of civil rights‐era and black‐power activists
who challenged discrimination and celebrated black pride; instead he drew lessons from centrist black politicians
like former Massachusetts senator Edward Brooke, Los Angeles mayor Tom Bradley, and Virginia governor
Douglas Wilder, all of whom won elections in majority white jurisdictions by downplaying race. Still, as an African American candidate, the question of race was unavoidable for Obama. On March 18, 2008,
Obama delivered perhaps the most famous address of his entire career, in response to the release of excerpts
from controversial sermons by his Chicago minister, the Reverend Jeremiah Wright Jr. In his speech, “A More
Perfect Union,” Obama distanced himself from Wright but also took the occasion to offer a history lesson on
race and civil rights in the United States. Obama called for “a more perfect union,” echoing Abraham Lincoln’s
soaring rhetoric. Rather than spotlighting ongoing discrimination, Obama celebrated “the men and women of
every color and creed who serve together, and fight together, and bleed together under the same flag.”
Obama called for unity: “I believe deeply that we cannot solve the challenges of our time unless we solve
them together—unless we perfect our union by understanding that we may have different stories but
common hopes; that we may not look the same and we may not have come from the same place but we all
want to move in the same direction.”1 The emphasis on unity remained consistent throughout Obama’s
campaign, in his First Inaugural Address, and in the first years of his presidency.
Even if Obama mostly avoided racial controversy, the racial symbolism of his election and inauguration was
lost on no one. Obama had won nearly 43 percent of white votes and overwhelming majorities of African
Americans and Latinos. Harvard professor Henry Louis Gates called Obama’s election “a magical
transformative moment . . . the symbolic culmination of the black freedom struggle, the grand achievement of
a great collective dream.”2 Many commentators argued that Obama’s victory heralded a new post‐civil rights
era in the United States.
Addressing the huge crowd gathered in Washington on January 20, 2009, Obama only briefly alluded to
America’s racial past, even as the television cameras focused on prominent black faces on the stage, including
singer Aretha Franklin in her elaborate hat and the tearful Congressman Lewis. Obama noted—with some
pleasure—that “a man whose father less than sixty years ago might not have been served at a local restaurant
can now stand before you to take a most sacred oath.”
Many speechwriters, political analysts, and journalists observed differences between Obama’s First Inaugural
Address and his previous speeches. By the standards of the campaign, Obama was restrained and somber. No
single passage of the speech had the resonance of Franklin Roosevelt’s famous phrase that “the only thing we
have to fear is fear itself” or Ronald Reagan’s proclamation that “government is not the solution to our problem;
government is the problem.” Obama’s March 2008 race speech was both more substantive and more
electrifying. As communications scholar Kathleen Hall Jamieson argued, “the fact that the country’s first African‐
American president delivered the 2009 inaugural is more fixed in memory than any statement from it.” The content of Obama’s address, however, is revealing, even if it lacked catchy sound bites or timeless
aphorisms. Obama situated his presidency in a long American political and religious tradition. He began the
speech by referring to “our ancestors” and “We the People” and “our founding documents.” His words echoed
Abraham Lincoln; he consummated the address with a long quote from George Washington.
Obama also laced the address with Christian language, drawing from “the words of Scripture” and referring to
“the God‐given promise that all are equal, all are free, and all deserve a chance to pursue their full measure of
happiness.” References to the founders and the Christian Bible are commonplace in major presidential
addresses, but they took on particular significance in 2009, after a campaign in which Obama faced charges
that he was un‐American. A vocal minority wrongly believed that he was born outside the United States or
that he was a Muslim.
Obama’s address was steeped in traditional political and religious symbolism, but the President also offered a
broader reading of American history and nationhood. He referred to slaves (those “who endured the lash of
the whip”) and to “the bitter swill of civil war and segregation.” And to those Americans who assert that the
United States is a Christian nation, Obama offered a far more inclusive definition: “We are a nation of
Christians and Muslims, Jews and Hindus, and nonbelievers.” Many commentators were especially struck by
the fact that Obama was the first president to mention atheists in a positive vein.
Obama turned to the domestic and international crises that he inherited. The country had fallen into the worst
economic slump in seventy years, and the United States was embroiled in two costly and unpopular wars. As
was the case with most inaugural addresses, Obama’s offered exhortations rather than policy
recommendations. He offered a moral critique of what he believed were the root causes of the crisis: “Our
economy is badly weakened, a consequence of greed and irresponsibility on the part of some but also our
collective failure to make hard choices and prepare the nation for a new age.” On foreign policy, he looked
onto the world with optimism: “as the world grows smaller, our common humanity shall reveal itself; and that
America must play its role in ushering in a new era of peace.” Building on the theme of commonality and
unity, he promised to “the Muslim world . . . a new way forward, based on mutual interest and mutual
respect.”
While some observers heard these comments as Obama’s rebuke of the policies of George W. Bush and the
Republicans, the new president sought common ground with his political opponents at home. He offered a
fusion of liberal and conservative views of the economy and government. To those who believed that market
excesses were responsible for the economic crisis, Obama argued that the market’s “power to generate
wealth and expand freedom is unmatched,” a sentiment that echoed President Ronald Reagan. But Obama
also distanced himself from right‐wing arguments that government was the problem, instead asserting that
“[t]he question we ask today is not whether our government is too big or too small, but whether it works,” a
position similar to that of President Bill Clinton. Here Obama clearly staked out ground in the political center,
fusing elements of liberalism and conservatism.
In the end, whether on race or the role of government, whether on the market or on Islam, Obama’s First
Inaugural Address demonstrated the President’s ideological and political commitment to finding common
ground through reason and persuasion. Over the ensuing years of his presidency, that belief in unity—at home
and abroad—would be put to a test far more difficult than the President, in his soaring rhetoric in late January
2009, could ever have imagined.
