It may seem at first glance that California and the ancient land of Mesopotamia have very little
in common. Mesopotamia, located in modern‐day Iraq, is considered the cradle of Western
civilization, and first became home to an economic power in 3100 B.C. California, on the Pacific
Coast of North America, did not achieve status as an economic power until almost 5,000 years
later, at the end of the 1800s. In spite of these differences of time and place, it is important to
realize that both regions were able to rise to economic power because of their unique
geographical landscapes.
Let’s first look at Mesopotamia. It was bordered on either side by two rivers: the Tigris and the
Euphrates. These rivers had many different branches, or tributaries, feeding into them, creating
a vast network of streams and canals. The canals provided a built‐in transportation system for
the Sumerian and Akkadian peoples who first settled the place. Using the simple canoes and log
raftsthey built, they could communicate and trade. This ability to trade was especially important
since Mesopotamia did not have its own supply of resources such as timber, metals or semi‐
precious stones, and had to import all of these things. Water routes allowed Mesopotamia to
import the materials needed to become an economic power.  
Water transport also greatly increased the speed of communication in Mesopotamia. Overland
transportation at that time was painfully slow and clunky, via simple wheeled pushcarts, or pack
animals such as donkeys or camels. With water transport, settlers could use downstream river
currents to ship goods much faster. Raw materials arrived at the bigger towns with greater
frequency, which meant that these towns and cities could grow and develop faster. Knowledge
and news from other regions could also come in quicker, allowing the Mesopotamians to become savvy and cosmopolitan. So we see that the speedy input of goods and knowledge via
the waterways allowed the Mesopotamians a distinct advantage over competing regions, and
allowed their economic and cultural life to flourish.  
Mesopotamia was also blessed with especially rich soil. Diverse elevations (there are both high
hills and low‐lying marshlands) and climatic variations in the region allowed for the evolution of
many types of edible seeds and plants, as well as a variety of farm animals. Mesopotamia is
considered the birthplace of agriculture—it is here where the first species of wheat, barley, flax,
chick pea and lentil were first cultivated by man for human consumption. In looking at the
development of farming in Mesopotamia, we see that it was a combination of Mesopotamia’s
geographical advantage (specifically, its abundance of plant and animal species) and the
intelligence of its human settlers that made it all possible. With so many crops, the settlers of
Mesopotamia could be well‐nourished, which gave them the physical strength to thrive, and
also gave them many products to trade with other regions. It is no surprise, then, that historians
have dubbed Mesopotamia as “The Fertile Crescent,” due to its productive soil.  
While the great city of Babylon was thriving in Mesopotamia in 3100 B.C., California remained
rather insignificant as a trade or cultural center. It was inhabited by nomadic tribes who lived a
hunter‐gatherer lifestyle. Life in these tribes was simply a matter of day‐to‐day survival, and no
deeper developments, such as writing or advanced technological inventions, were able to take
place. Unlike tribes in other parts of North America, the California Indians never built great
settlements or amassed significant wealth. This is partly because for a long time California
Indians were geographically isolated—cut off by the Sierra Nevada mountains on one side, the
vast Pacific Ocean on the other, and desert to the south. They could not easily communicate
with tribes outside of California. Also, they could not cultivate crops because the land was for
the most part too dry. When João Rodrigues Calbrilho, a Portuguese explorer, arrived with his
crew in California in the early 1500s (they were the first Europeans to do so), the crew
abandoned the place, thinking it was too isolated from the world’s other trade points.  
It was only in the mid‐1800s, when American settlers from the East discovered precious gold
buried under California soil that the region finally started to become an important economic
center. The natural resources hidden in California’s land, in the form of gold and oil, motivated
the Americans to somehow overcome the region’s isolation. First attempts to do this were the
Pony Express and the Overland Express, companies that used horses to relay communication
from California to other parts of America. Then came the telegraph, and soon after that the
transcontinental railroad, which ended California’s isolation issue once and for all.  
With the arrival of the transcontinental railroad in 1869, California’s natural geographical
advantages could finally be exploited, and by 1900, the area was in full economic boom. The
American settlers who had built the railroads quickly replaced the nomadic native tribes. They
opened up commerce along the 840 miles of Pacific shoreline, which soon became full of
bustling ports that brought labor and trade goods across the Pacific Ocean from China and
Japan. The American settlers also built large aqueducts to irrigate inland California, which
previously had been too dry to cultivate crops. Thanksto the state’stemperate, Mediterranean‐
like climate, a large variety of crops could flourish, now that there was sufficient water. Like
Mesopotamia 5,000 years earlier, California became an agricultural giant, and today it is
America’s prime producer of almonds, walnuts, avocados, grapes, melons, peaches,
strawberries, and wine. Hollywood, another major economic asset to California, formed around
Los Angelesin the early 1900s because the area’s geography wassuited to filmmaking. Southern
California had large natural spaces and year‐round good weather, both helpful conditions for
making films. California continues to be an economic powerhouse today thanks to its
geographical assets—natural resources, good climate, and fertile soil. California ranks as the
world’s 12th largest economy.  
We now see that, like Mesopotamia, California has certain geographical advantages that have
made it a power player on the world stage. California did not have it as easy as Mesopotamia
did—it had several geographical disadvantages to conquer before its advantages could really
shine. Technology had to evolve so that communication between California and other parts of
the world was not so difficult and slow. Aqueducts needed to be built to irrigate the dry inland
areas, making them lush and fertile like the ancient Mesopotamian soil. But once these changes
were in place, the other, significant geographical advantages of California could be enjoyed, and
the state could assume its place in world history, alongside ancient Mesopotamia, as one of the
great centers of economic power. The examples of California and Mesopotamia show us that
no matter what time of history we are in, geography will play a key role in determining its
economic promise.
