Given the regular outbreaks of religious and political violence in the Middle East,
it’s easy to think of Muslims, Jews, and Christians as natural antagonists. This wasn’t
always the case, however. For hundreds of years, Muslims, Jews, and Christians lived in
peace on the Iberian Peninsula, in what is now Spain. They farmed side-by-side, governed
together, and even shared their most important intellectual and religious texts. This
collaboration led to the founding of the first modern universities in the West.
But this peaceful collaboration is not what many remember most about the Muslim
empire in Spain. What’s most commonly known about the Muslim empire in Spain is its
savagely violent beginning and end. After watching for centuries as the Visigoth empire
collapsed into corruption and civil war, Muslims in Northern Africa began planning a
massive invasion of the Iberian Peninsula. Under General Tariq ibn Ziyad, an army sailed
nine miles from Africa to the Rock of Gibraltar (derived from the Arabic “Tariq’s
Mountain”) in 711. By 718, Muslims controlled all of today’s Spain and Portugal and part
of southern France. This territory was called al-Andalus. Almost 800 years later, the last
Muslim leaders were expelled from Spain during a brutal 11-year military campaign that
ended on January 2, 1492, when King Mohammad XII surrendered in Granada.
Between these violent bookends, however, thrived a rich and multicultural culture
called the Convivencia, or coexistence. While there were occasional outbreaks of violence
and repression by Muslim authorities directed against people of other faiths, Christians and Jews were officially labeled “dhimmis,” or protected peoples under Islamic law. A
small number of Jews and Christians rose to powerful positions in the government.
People from all three faiths also joined together to share ancient texts that had
been preserved by their respective religious teachers. In Toledo and in the empire’s
capital of Cordoba, monks and scholars gathered from across Europe and the Muslim
world to translate and debate important texts. Perhaps the most important of these
scholars was Averroes, who was known in Arabic as Ibn Rushd. Averroes, a judge and
scholar, delivered the forgotten wisdom of Aristotle to the rest of the world. He helped
rescue ancient Greek philosophy from oblivion, enabling the Muslim empire’s golden age
to provide the intellectual backbone later used to build modern Western civilization.
Born in 1126 to a family of prominent civic leaders, Averroes was considered a
polymath, becoming a master in Greek and Islamic philosophy, theology, mathematics,
and science. He started translating Aristotle from Greek into Arabic after the ruler of the
Iberian caliphate asked him to create a version of the text that was clearer and easier to
understand than previous translations. Averroes went on to translate most of the known
works by Aristotle plus The Republic by Plato and also published many short
commentaries on each work.
His work came at an important time. By the 12th century, only a handful of
Europeans could still read the works of Aristotle in their original Greek. Few copies of the
original survived because they had been written on fragile papyrus, and most versions
copied onto more durable and expensive parchment were owned by Islamic authorities.
After circulating through the scholastic society of Cordoba, Aristotle’s works were copied
and sent across Europe, sparking a resurgence of interest in his philosophy in the West
that continues today.
While all this seems very remote, the reasons behind Averroes’s work are just as
important today. His best-known original work, “The Incoherence of the Incoherence,”
was a defense of the rational mind over religious belief as the root of wisdom and
knowledge. Aimed at Islamic leaders who were trying to enact a stricter version of
religious law across the empire, Averroes took a risky position, arguing that humans
should be the ultimate deciders of law and justice, not God. Five hundred years before
writers such as Thomas Hobbs navigated a similar path, Averroes’s positions have caused
many to call him the "founding father of secular thought in Western Europe.” Many of his
works were kept at the personal library of the local caliph, or emperor, who was
estimated to have collected around 400,000 books, making it one of the largest libraries
in the world at the time. 
While Averroes argued for greater plurality of world views, the culture of the
Iberian peninsula promoted religious equality—or at least some modicum of tolerance—
on a day-to-day basis. Jews emigrated from the Middle East and Northern Africa to Toledo
and other major cities on the Iberian peninsula, creating some of the most stable and
prosperous Jewish communities in the world at the time. It was here that a Hebrew
Renaissance flourished, resulting in some of the most important works of Hebrew poetry.
Perhaps the most surprising collaboration between religions during the al-Andalus
empire happened inside the mosques, which were shared between Muslims and
Christians. This was most apparent at the Mosque-Cathedral of Cordoba. Founded in the
year 600 by the Visigoths as a Catholic church, it was divided by Muslim leaders into
Muslim and Christian sections after the Muslim conquest. As more Muslims immigrated
to Cordoba and their ranks overwhelmed the building, the emir (ruler of al-Andalus)
purchased the other half from the Christians and allowed the Catholics to rebuild
churches that had been destroyed during the invasion. Thus began a two-century
construction project to enlarge the mosque, which came to include some of the tallest
and most ornate indoor structures in all of medieval Europe. The mosque was
rechristened as Cordoba’s cathedral when Christians re-took the city in 1236. Three
hundred years later, local church leaders proposed to destroy the huge mosque and build
a church in its place. But the townspeople were so opposed to the plan they won a rare
intercession from the Holy Roman Emperor, second in the Vatican hierarchy only to the
Pope, who agreed the mosque should be saved. Today the entire sprawling complex is
protected by the United Nations as a World Heritage Site.
Coexistence between Jews, Christians, and Muslims during Islamic control of Spain
was not perfect. Jews and Christians were never fully equal to Muslims under Islamic law,
and their treatment varied based on changing political and religious decisions of Muslim
leaders. But the centuries of Muslim rule were characterized by greater tolerance than
anything found at the time in Europe. And thanks to the relative tolerance of the Muslim
al-Andalus empire, Western Society rediscovered some of the philosophy and art that
would become its foundation.
