Hundreds of years ago, before North America was split up according to states and
countries, native populations lived in the many varied areas of the continent. There were
jungles, forests, riverlands, dry prairies, wetlands, and many other types of geographies where
people lived. There were no cities as we know them today: humans lived in tune with nature,
relying on their surroundings to build shelters, hunt and gather food, and create forms of
exchange (for example, shells found on beaches could be traded for animal skins).
Each Native American tribe was attuned to the specific land on which they lived, and
had certain customs that utilized their land to the utmost. Native Americans living in what is
now known as the Midwest relied on hunting large animals like bison for their meat and their
skins. Their meat provided an important source of nourishment for many tribes, and their
skins were a valuable material that was used in the production of clothes and teepees, a type
of shelter. Other tribes who lived on the eastern coast of North America made extensive use of
the forests there, trapping small animals and game (like deer) that lived among the trees, and
farming hearty foods that could handle the changes in weather, like corn. Still other tribes,
who lived in the deserts of what is now Arizona, built homes in the rocky cliffs and hills for
protection.
The variety of plant and animal life in these specific environments is called biodiversity.
The tribes who lived in what is now known as Seattle fished salmon, while the tribes who lived
in what is now known as Maine caught crabs and lobsters. As you can see, even though each group relied on seafood, the type of fish they ate was dependent on the type of fish that was
available to them. At the time we are thinking about, if you lived in Seattle, there were no
restaurants you could go to and order lobster!
Now think for a moment about what this means. Let’s say one year, a pod of whales was
unable to go to their usual feeding area in Alaska because a school of sharks was inhabiting
those waters during the whales’ feeding time. So, looking for other sources of food, the whales
swam down towards Seattle and noticed a large population of salmon. They ate all the salmon
and, full and content, swam away to their next destination. The next week, the human tribes
living in Seattle go to where the salmon usually are in order to get the first big catch of the
season, and they find that no salmon are there. Instead of catching salmon, a staple of their
diet, the humans must find another food source: their habitat has changed, and now the
humans, like the whales before them, must adapt to their new situation.
This brings us to the very important idea of the ecosystem. An ecosystem is a very
complex and delicate arrangement of plants and animals that provide nourishment for each
other in a variety of ways. If one part of the ecosystem changes or is disrupted, it can affect
the entire workings of an environment.
Humans have made changes to their ecosystems to serve a specific need. And in certain
cases, the goal is to disrupt the population of another species within the ecosystem. However,
there can be unintended consequences. One example is the use of pesticides. When American
farmers began using pesticides (chemical insect-repellants) to get rid of bugs that decimated
entire harvests of crops, they had no idea what the consequences would be—or whether
there would be any consequences. As scientists began to study how people used certain types
of chemicals for certain types of crops, they learned that there are some pesticides that are
not just harmful for insects—they are harmful for humans too, and were making many people
sick after they had eaten the crops that had been sprayed with those pesticides. With this
knowledge, scientists were able to develop other pesticides that were less harmful for humans
but were still useful in getting rid of the bugs that liked to eat humans’ important crops. As you
can see, the changes that humans made in the ecosystem—the biodiversity that the humans
cut down on by making sure the insects left the plants alone—needed to be studied carefully
so that the changes made were sure to be beneficial. 

