In the Mesa Verde National Park in Colorado, one of the most amazing sightsin the United States
is dug into the side of a mountain. Sandy‐colored towers, walls and rooms sit there, overlooking
the park. They have no roofs, but the structures are protected by the overhanging cliff. Eight
centuries after their construction, they are in excellent condition—and remain one of the most
intriguing archaeological sites in the country.
Who built these fabulous dwellings? Why did they choose to dig them into the face of the rock
itself? When did they live, and how did their civilization fade?
Although not all of those questions have definite answers, archeologists have discovered much
about these long‐ago Native Americans. The largest of their dwellings, Cliff Palace, was
discovered on December 18, 1888, by a pair of Colorado cowboys who were riding the mesa in
search of missing cattle. They spied the crumbling structures through the driving snow and rode
their horses toward one of the most intriguing finds in archeological history.
Cliff Palace and the other cliff dwellings were constructed by the Ancestral Pueblo people, a
group comprised of several Native American tribes whose descendants include the Hopi, Zuni
and Acoma people. The Ancestral Pueblo people lived in and around the American Southwest
and their history goes back to as early as 100 A.D., during a period known as "Late Basketmaker
II," due to the fine woven baskets produced during this period.
Over the next thousand years, the people of the Southwest settled down gradually. They
stopped living in caves and shallow pits, and began building homes. They moved from a strictly
hunter‐gatherer culture to one increasingly dependent on agriculture, growing beans and
domesticating animals like turkeys. The more they farmed, the more water they needed, and
they built dams, walls and other basic irrigation systems.
Their civilization continued advancing, and by the period known as "Pueblo I," the Ancestral
Pueblo people began building large stone communities. These sprawling dwellings, some of
which had as many as 100 rooms, were the forerunner to the later cliff dwellings. As agricultural
life began to be more centered on recently‐introduced cotton, and the communities' artisans
became more advanced in pottery, the cultural life of the community focused around the kivas.
What is a kiva? It is an underground circular chamber used for ceremonial purposes, and the
largest Ancestral Pueblo dwellings had many of them. In the photo of Cliff Palace on the first
page, you can see the kivas in the front of the picture: the low, round pits around which most
of the towers were built. It is easy to imagine the people of Cliff Palace gathering in these kivas
to carry out social ceremonies around the campfire.
By 1200 A.D., the Ancestral Pueblo people began building their homes into the cliffs. No one
knows precisely why they moved into the hills, but it's possible that the shift was to make their
homes easier to defend in times of war. Many of the cliff dwellings in Mesa Verde National Park
are accessible only by rope‐ladder, which would have made them very easy to defend against a
potential attacker.
Most of the dwellings in Mesa Verde are built in shallow parts of the rock, and are able to hold
only two or three rooms. But Cliff Palace, which was built up over the course of the 1200s, is
much larger. It contains over 150 individual rooms and more than 20 kivas. At its peak, it could
have provided shelter for more than 100 people.
One of the most intriguing features of the dwellings is the size of the doorways, which are much
smaller than the ones we have today. This would not have bothered the people of Cliff Palace,
because they were much shorter than the people of the 21st Century. The men were around 5
feet 5 inches tall, and the women around 5 feet tall. Their apartments, which were accessed by
climbing tall wooden ladders, averaged about 6 feet 8 inches tall—a much lower ceiling than
you are probably used to!
Just as no one is quite sure why the Ancestral Pueblo people began building dwellings like Cliff
Palace, no one knows exactly why they eventually abandoned them. A theory is connected with
what happened in 1276, when just as Cliff Palace was reaching its height, the region was struck
by the "Great Drought." For 23 years, rainfall was sparse, a catastrophe that would continue to
plague the region off‐and‐on until around 1450. As agriculture became more and more difficult,
the Ancestral Pueblo people were perhaps forced to move to better farmland—and Cliff Palace
had to be left behind.
