Imagine a life directly defined by roughly a third of a year of rain and flooding. The people of
ancient Mesopotamia, Egypt, and the Kingdom of Kush all lived that life: their economies,
power, and simple survival depended on the seasons of the rivers that ran through each
empire.  
Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia made up parts of the area known as the Fertile Crescent,
which experienced rain every year for about 100 days, beginning in the late spring or early
summer. For ancient Egypt, this caused the Nile River to flood, which saturated the normally
arid land around it with water and nutrient‐rich, river‐born soil called silt. Ancient Egyptians
are now revered as the masters of desert agriculture, for their irrigation technology allowed
them to cultivate crops during the dry months, from a fall‐season sowing to springtime
harvest. Their expertise started with simply monitoring weather patterns and gauging the rise
and fall of the Nile’s water levels, practices by which the nation’s people were able to plan
their planting and harvest seasons accordingly.
Some special inventions revolving around the rainy season included the system of dikes and
canals built to contain and direct the floodwaters of the Nile. By diverting water, ancient
Egyptians were able to keep it from washing onto un‐farmable desert terrain, where it would essentially be wasted. Instead, the ability to move water to the crops that needed it allowed
for a productive growing season and higher crop yield.  
Ancient Egyptians grew a variety of crops, and they were able to build cities around the
abundance. They traded grains like corn (and in surplus years, could store excess in granaries
as well), made linen from flax, and sustained themselves on garden crops grown in smaller
plots, often part of personal households. Cities thrived along the Nile, in large part because of
the proximity to the obvious transportation, which facilitated trade. As the fruits of farm labor
were traded, city merchants grew wealthier, and the metropolis thrived.  
   
The same sort of growth was characteristic of the nearby kingdom of Kush, also known as
Nubia. Kush was situated just south of ancient Egypt, in what is now southern Egypt and
northern Sudan. Kush’s two capitals, first Napata and then Meroe, were each situated along
the Nile. The Kushites employed many of the same irrigation techniques as the ancient
Egyptians did, taking advantage of the rainy season to keep the land fertile. Using dams and
cataracts, the Kushites directed the flow of water to grow wheat, barley, lentils, peas, and
even dates and mangoes. Waterwheels known as “saqia” allowed for even further movement
of water to higher ground.  
Midway through the golden years of Kush (called, too, the “Land of Gold” for its gold trade),
the arrival of iron changed farming forever. An invasion by the Assyrians cut short the
influence of Kush in Egypt, but while they lost power over their Northern neighbors, the
Kushites gained knowledge of ironwork. The deserts east of the Nile near the city of Meroe
were rich in iron ore, and as Kush began to make tools such as hoes and plows, crop yields
increased. Again, with the proximity of the harvest to the river—the main means of trade and
travel—cities like Napata and Meroe grew and enjoyed prosperity with the agriculture‐driven
commerce.
Located across the Red Sea and the Syrian Desert from Kush, there was the famous region of
the Fertile Crescent called Mesopotamia. Framed by the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, it
occupied what is now Iraq. The area experienced the same cyclical flooding periods that
ancient Egypt and Kush did, and thus had to learn to adapt. The difference is, this “land
between rivers” (the meaning of the origin of the name “Mesopotamia”) had the flooding of
not just one waterway but an entire flowing border to harness. However, like ancient Egypt
and Kush, its location made it an ideal site for irrigation practices: as the people of the Nile did,
Mesopotamians coaxed water into typically drier regions with canals. The land was routinely
fertilized by rich silt washed up by the rivers; Mesopotamia supported the harvest of barley, onions, grapes, apples, and turnips. Cattle and sheep grazed on fertile grassland, and
fishermen made a living selling and trading their catch.  
Like the famous cities of Thebes, Meroe, and Napata, Mesopotamian cities such as Ur and
Babylon sat near the rivers, again seeing success on the water because of the agricultural and
trade possibilities making commerce possible and merchants rich. In each city, and in each
kingdom, success and power were facilitated by both agricultural advancements (such as iron
tools and irrigation) and the means to trade and sell a harvest (the rivers). The reigns of
ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Kush were all dependent on an uncomplicated but involved
cycle: the rivers provided the water needed to grow crops such as wheat and corn, technology
made irrigation, plowing, and harvest possible, and trade generated income to the cities along
the river. In this way, waterfront settlements in each region became seats of commerce and
power: they were self‐sustaining metropolises.  
The downfall of these cities was also woven with the success and failure of the agriculture of
ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Kush. Generations of tough farming and overgrazing sapped
land of nutrients, and in Kush, the deforestation that accompanied the mining of iron ore
caused devastating erosion. As land morphed from oasis to desert, cities lost their power:
there was nothing left to grow, and nothing left to trade. In spite of their tremendous
advances in agricultural technology, these ancient cultures could not combat dust for long,
and when farms dried out, so too did the power and success of ancient Egyptian, Kushian, and
Mesopotamian cities.
