On May 14, 1902, Museum geologist Edmund Otis Hovey boarded the U.S. cruiser Dixie, bound for the
Caribbean. He had been sent by Museum President Morris K. Jesup to investigate volcanic eruptions that
had killed nearly 30,000 people in less than 24 hours the previous week.
The first came on the afternoon of May 7, when Mt. Soufrière, on the island of St. Vincent, erupted in a
boiling mudflow of steam and ash, killing 1,565 people. The next morning, 75 miles to the north on
Martinique, Mt. Pelée exploded in a cloud of hot gases, volcanic ash, and rocks. Traveling at a speed of 300
miles an hour, the searing mass rushed down the mountainside, incinerating everything in its path,
including the picturesque seaside town of Saint-Pierre and nearly all the ships in the harbor. Within two
minutes, some 27,000 people were dead. On May 20, the day before Hovey’s arrival in Martinique, a
second equally powerful eruption covered the now uninhabited town of Saint-Pierre again.
The scene he encountered defied words. “The devastation wrought by the eruption cannot be appreciated
from a verbal description,” Hovey wrote in The American Museum Journal of 1902, “and even photographs
do not convey an adequate idea of what has happened” to a city that had enjoyed a reputation as the Paris
of the Caribbean. Once a hub of trade in rum, sugar, cocoa, and coffee, its boulevards lined with handsome
homes and showy shops, Saint-Pierre, as Hovey found it, was now a smoldering ruin with barely a brick
left standing. Lying as the city did in a cul-de-sac in the path of incandescent volcanic discharge, Hovey
wrote, Saint-Pierre and its residents had been “as helpless as an animal in a trap.”
The eruptions were of a type called nuée ardente, French for “glowing cloud.” Magma or molten rock,
supercharged with gases, is less dense than rock and so rises to the surface through cracks and crevices.
If the gases can boil off gradually at the surface, the potential force is diffused, sometimes creating the
effusive flow of lava we tend to associate with volcano eruptions. But in a nuée ardente, the gaseous
magma is blocked and pressure builds until it is eventually released as a dense, swirling mass of hot gas,
incandescent dust, and rock fragments known as a pyroclastic flow.
The explosive cloud can first rise high into the air and then collapse downward, as Pliny the Younger
observed in what is thought to be the earliest recorded description of a volcanic eruption. In letters
written years after the AD 79 eruption of Vesuvius, the Roman magistrate gave a remarkably detailed
description of what he had seen as an 18-year-old across the bay. Vesuvius is sited east of what is now
Naples, Italy, and the AD 79 nuée ardente killed some 20,000 people in the towns of Pompeii and
Herculaneum.
Add water to the mix—as at Mt. Soufrière, which was known for its beautiful crater lake—and the result
is the addition of a mudflow, or lahar. The mass of gaseous magma also can create chemical changes that
eat away at rocks, weakening them, until the cloud of ash and gas blows out the mountainside before
rushing fast and furiously downward. This was documented firsthand at Mount St. Helens in 1980 and is
believed to have happened at Mt. Pelée in 1902.
“This type of volcano is the most explosive, literally analogous to twisting off the top of a soda bottle,”
explains geologist James Webster, curator in the Department of Earth and Planetary
Sciences. “When the mountain is ripped open, the volcanic blast is faster and potentially more deadly
because it has less distance to travel to reach the surface… What Hovey observed about trees at Mont
Pelée is consistent with Mount St. Helens.”
Hovey described an odd sight. “The line between scorched and unscorched areas was strikingly sharp,”
he wrote. “In many places the line of demarcation passed through single trees, leaving one side scorched
and brown while the other side remained as green as if no eruption had occurred.”
During his Martinique expedition, Hovey also collected and sent back to the Museum invaluable
specimens, molten household objects, pulverized street signs, and lumps of half-melted lava—called
“bread-crust bombs” for their cracked tops— which had been thrown out of the volcano during the
eruption. [A number of these artifacts will be on view in the Museum’s special exhibition Nature’s Fury:
The Science of Natural Disasters.]
At the time, volcanology was still in its infancy. A crude seismometer was first introduced in 1840, but
even with that technology, scientists simply lacked a clear understanding of
how volcanoes erupt. “Since that time we have learned much more about gases, the relationship between
seismic activity and magma movement, even about gas opening the rock and providing a pathway for
magma to follow,” says Dr. Webster.
Hovey’s research was part of that long, steady progression toward a better understanding of volcanoes, of
which better prediction is the goal and in which the Museum continues to play an important role.
Webster, for example, has explored Vesuvius eight times and teaches a course in Naples every fall. The
Museum’s collection of samples from Vesuvius is among the best in the world, after the University of
Naples Federico II and the University of Pisa.
With little knowledge of how volcanic eruptions occurred, the residents of Mt. Pelée woefully
underestimated the risks of living in its vicinity and ignored signals that it was still active. Occasional
spewings of steam and ash were taken less as a warning than an occasion for picnics near the mouth of
the volcano. As J. Chatenay of Seaboard National Bank, who had lived in Saint-Pierre until shortly before
the 1902 eruption, told The World newspaper on May 10, 1902: “No one ever thought of fearing the
volcano, which all thought to be extinct…The people wandered about by thousands, never dreaming that
there was any danger.”
Even ominous signs in the months and weeks before the May 8 eruption failed to raise adequate alarm.
On April 23, earthquakes dislodged dishes from shelves in Saint-Pierre. The next day, fine ash fell for two
hours on a town nearby. On May 2, a lightning-lit column of ash and fumes rose nearly two miles high
above the mountain, and an inch of ash covered Saint-Pierre. On May 5, a mudflow from the volcano
killed 23 people north of the city, and a tsunami reached the harbor 15 minutes later. On May 6, the
mountain flung huge molten rocks in the air.
Given the state of the science in the 1900s, the people of Saint-Pierre couldn’t possibly have foreseen
what was to befall them. But even today, with better science to back up predictions, an estimated half a
billion people live within range of an active volcano, including more than 4,000 townspeople of the
rebuilt Saint-Pierre and, perhaps more strikingly, roughly 4 million people who live in and around
Naples. In fact, Naples recently built an emergency response hospital on the slopes of Vesuvius. “It’s a
strange concept,” says Webster. “The first place you’d go is the first place that would be destroyed.”
Bear in mind that as natural disasters go, the risks worldwide associated with earthquakes and
hurricanes are orders of magnitude greater in loss of life and property damage than those associated with
volcanic eruptions. Earthquakes alone affect the lives of some five million people a year. And where
volcanoes are being monitored, scientists can generally predict eruptions in advance.
Still, the prospect of evacuating a population as dense as that around Vesuvius is daunting. In modern
history, Vesuvius had relatively large eruptions in 1631 and 1944, with smaller ones in between—so it is
by no means dead. But complicating the assessment of actual risk is the difficulty humans have
appreciating geological timescales in which patterns are measured not in decades but in thousands and tens of thousands of years. In addition, even scientists disagree. Vesuvius operates on a very long cycle of
major eruptions every 500 to 1,000 years, says Webster, and there is one camp that theorizes a large
eruption is not imminent and another that believes Vesuvius could erupt catastrophically soon.
Asked which side he falls on, he says, “I don’t know enough. But it definitely warrants heavy monitoring.”
