Throughout history, women have felt the pressure to conform to their society’s definition
of beauty. Standards of beauty often reflect cultural values and beliefs, and women have gone
to great lengths to meet these ideals. At times, women have had to take extreme measures to
live up to these standards at the cost of their own well‐being.
One of the most striking examples is the Chinese practice of foot binding. For centuries,
small feet were considered very attractive and ladylike, and the Chinese believed they made a
woman’s movements more feminine and dainty. In order to attain such a coveted feature, it
was common practice for young girls to break and bind their toes with the intention of
shrinking their feet—a process that kept them in excruciating pain for months. Foot binding
was practiced for over a millennium, until the Chinese government officially outlawed the
practice in 1911.
According to the legend, foot binding began when an ancient Chinese emperor’s dancer
bound her feet to suggest the shape of a new moon or a flower. The emperor was impressed
with her "lotus dance," and other women emulated the practice until it spread across the
country. (Bound feet were also known as lotus flowers.)
Yet the Chinese foot binding tradition officially dates back to the Tang Dynasty. It gained
popularity with the rise of neo‐Confucianism and a hierarchical system of subservience.
Scholars who reinterpreted ancient Confucian thought believed they discovered a "lost"
philosophy focusing on nature, training the mind, and cultivating discipline. In neo‐
Confucianism, the subjects of a kingdom were expected to serve their rulers (who were
considered mothers and fathers of the country) and in turn, wives were expected to defer to
their husbands, sons to fathers, and the weak to the powerful.
Zhu‐Xi, an influential scholar of neo‐Confucianism, contributed to the acceptance of foot
binding in China. According to Zhu‐Xi, the practice reflected purity and discipline. He
introduced it in Fujian as a way of spreading Chinese culture and teaching about the proper
way for men and women to interact.
Another factor that led to the popularity of foot binding was women’s decreased
involvement in civic life during the Song dynasty between 960‐1279. During this period, a
woman’s most important task was considered giving birth to sons. Women didn’t participate
in politics and were infrequently seen on the streets, in comparison with the previous Tang
dynasty. Some historians suggest that the diminished status of women during the Song
Dynasty made foot binding more socially acceptable.
Binding usually began when a girl was between the ages of four and seven. First the foot
was soaked in hot water and the toenails clipped. Then came the painful part: the four small
toes were broken, and the foot was bandaged tightly with the toes turned under toward the
bottom of the foot. (It was believed that young bones were soft, which is why binding started
early.) In order for the girl to maintain her balance, the big toe was left unturned. Every few
days, the foot was unwrapped and then wrapped again even tighter, until the foot shrunk to about four inches long. The arches were also broken, which caused the foot to contract even
more. The entire process could take three years or longer, and it was so debilitating that young
girls from wealthy families would often receive a servant to care for her personal needs, carry
her when her feet hurt, and look after her on sleepless nights when the pain was unbearable.
Foot binding wasn’t just painful. It could also be dangerous. Complications included
ulcerations and gangrene, and infections caused by ingrown toenails or lack of circulation from
tight bindings. Sometimes toes even fell off—though this was considered a good thing because
it meant the feet could be wrapped even tighter. Bound feet also had a foul odor and left
many young women hardly able to walk. Sadly, it’s estimated that up to 10 percent of girls
died in the process of foot binding.
Even if mothers could have objected to putting their daughters through such a
tremendously painful process, social pressure likely made them willing practitioners of foot
binding. Virtuous women were prized according to the tenets of Neo‐Confucianism, and foot
binding was the ultimate symbol of a woman’s purity and discipline. The ability to withstand
foot binding reflected a woman’s character, and her attractiveness was revealed not in her face
or body, but in her feet. A girl learned that her family’s reputation was linked to the binding of
her feet early in life. In fact, the process was so crucial to a woman’s status in China that a girl
with natural, unbound feet had limited marriage prospects, while girls with tiny, well‐bound feet
increased their chances of marrying into a good family and moving up in society.
Although the practice was promoted as a way to increase health and fertility, foot binding
was clearly detrimental to a woman’s well‐being. It greatly limited a woman’s ability to walk,
and some women became practically crippled. Bound feet forced women to hobble around and
take extremely small steps. Many men found this shuffling sort of walk very attractive. Yet as a
result of their compromised feet, women rarely participated in social or political life, often
becoming very dependent on their husbands and families. Even this was seen as a virtue, for a
woman who stayed at home was considered chaste and faithful to her husband.
At first glance, foot binding might seem to contradict Confucian thought, which forbids
body mutilation. However, since the feet were considered a sort of accessory, foot binding fell
into a different category altogether. Ironically, a practice promoted to achieve the ultimate
symbol of beauty grossly disfigured women’s feet. The toes often became gnarled or fused
together. Many men were unaware of the disfigurement caused by foot binding because
women’s feet were always carefully concealed. During the day, feet were covered in a binder,
socks and shoes, sprayed with perfume and scented powder, and then hidden beneath
leggings and skirts. At night women wore special slippers, even while sleeping. Women were
expected to wash their feet in private and separately from the rest of their bodies.
Not all Chinese practiced foot binding. It was less common among peasants and in poor
communities because women were needed to work in the fields. Mongols, Hakka and Tibetans
living in Chinese territory didn’t bind their feet at all. In Manchu province, foot binding was
outlawed. Yet because the “hobble” associated with bound feet was considered attractive, a
special type of "flower bowl" shoe was invented in Manchu to give women the same swaying
small steps. The shoe sat on a high platform made of wood or had a small central pedestal.
By the 20th century, both native Chinese and Christian missionaries were calling the
practice of foot binding into question. Anti‐foot binding reformers created natural‐foot
societies for members who promised not to bind their daughter’s feet, or not let their sons
marry women with bound feet. Many women’s rights groups attacked the practice because of
the suffering it caused women. Educated Chinese felt that the practice made them seem
uncivilized to the rest of the world. Yet even after the government banned the practice in the
early 20th century, some girls continued to bind their feet because it was such a long‐held
status symbol and a way for a woman to marry into money.
Today, few women with bound feet are still alive. The tiny, intricately decorated special
shoes made for bound feet will be all that remains of the painful practice.

