Severe weather does not happen in one place all the time, but when it happens, it’s important
to be prepared for it. Knowing the weather risks of where you live and how to plan for them
are key to staying safe in any kind of storm.
While tornadoes can hit any part of the United States at any time of year, there are parts of
the country—and certain seasons—in which tornadoes are much more common than others.
Tornadoes primarily hit the U.S. in an L-shaped area from Iowa to Colorado to Texas.
Oklahoma has the highest impact zone. Most tornadoes take place in this region in the month
of May.
It’s very helpful for weather scientists, emergency responders and community members to be
aware of this so-called “Tornado Alley” in keeping people safe. While it may be difficult to
protect buildings and other structures, maintaining public awareness helps humans protect
themselves and their families in instances of severe weather. Protecting human lives is the
most important thing. The National Weather Service provides timely warnings, and local TV
and radio stations broadcast these warnings so that people in the tornado’s path can seek
shelter in time. Towns also set off warning sirens that indicate there is potential for a tornado.
People who live in areas with high tornado frequency are also familiar with how to prepare for
these events. One way people might prepare for a tornado is to seek protection in a basement or storm shelter where heavy winds are less likely to blow around dangerous objects, which
could hurt someone. Often during storms people get hurt by flying debris rather than the
storm itself. People who don’t have basements or have disabilities preventing them from
moving with ease are sometimes encouraged to lie down in a bathtub and cover their heads.
These are just some of the ways people stay safe when a tornado is on the way.
Hurricanes, on the other hand, tend to strike coastal regions. You would not see a hurricane
hit the Tornado Alley, for instance, because there are no oceans nearby. Florida is one state in
the U.S. that gets hit by a large number of hurricanes. Meteorologists can usually predict
hurricanes several days in advance. If it’s safe to stay at home during a hurricane, people are
advised to cover their windows with shutters and stock up on food, water, medication,
batteries and other items they might need. As with tornadoes and other severe weather,
people should expect to lose power to their homes for potentially several days or more. Even
when the hurricane has passed, there can still be dangerous flooding in the streets for which
people should also be prepared.
Sometimes government emergency services will decide it’s not safe for people in the
hurricane’s path to stay in their homes, and they will be told to evacuate in advance. When
people evacuate their homes, they move to a safer region until the storm passes and they can
return home. 
