Friends and Fellow Citizens:
The period for a new election of a citizen to administer the executive government of the United States being
not far distant, and the time actually arrived when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person
who is to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me proper, especially as it may conduce to a more
distinct expression of the public voice, that I should now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to
decline being considered among the number of those out of whom a choice is to be made.
[…]
The acceptance of, and continuance hitherto in, the office to which your suffrages have twice called me have
been a uniform sacrifice of inclination to the opinion of duty and to a deference for what appeared to be your
desire.
[…]
The impressions with which I first undertook the arduous trust were explained on the proper occasion. In the
discharge of this trust, I will only say that I have, with good intentions, contributed towards the organization
and administration of the government the best exertions of which a very fallible judgment was capable. […] If
benefits have resulted to our country from [my] services, let it always be remembered to your praise, and as
an instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the passions, agitated in every
direction, were liable to mislead, […] the constancy of your support was the essential prop of the efforts, and a
guarantee of the plans by which they were effected.
[…]
Here, perhaps, I ought to stop. But a solicitude for your welfare, which cannot end but with my life, and the
apprehension of danger, natural to that solicitude, urge me, on an occasion like the present, to offer to your
solemn contemplation, and to recommend to your frequent review, some sentiments which are the result of
much reflection, of no inconsiderable observation, and which appear to me all-important to the permanency
of your felicity as a people.
[…]
The unity of government which constitutes you one people is also now dear to you. It is justly so, for it is a
main pillar in the edifice of your real independence, the support of your tranquility at home, your peace
abroad; of your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly prize. But as it is easy to foresee that, from different causes and from different quarters, much pains will be taken, many artifices
employed to weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth; as this is the point in your political fortress
against which the batteries of internal and external enemies will be most constantly and actively (though often
covertly and insidiously) directed, it is of infinite moment that you should properly estimate the immense
value of your national union to your collective and individual happiness; that you should cherish a cordial,
habitual, and immovable attachment to it[,] watching for its preservation with jealous anxiety[.]
For this you have every inducement of sympathy and interest. […] With slight shades of difference, you have
the same religion, manners, habits, and political principles. You have in a common cause fought and
triumphed together; the independence and liberty you possess are the work of joint counsels, and joint efforts
of common dangers, sufferings, and successes.
But these considerations, however powerfully they address themselves to your sensibility, are greatly
outweighed by those which apply more immediately to your interest. Here every portion of our country finds
the most commanding motives for carefully guarding and preserving the union of the whole.
The North, in an unrestrained intercourse with the South, protected by the equal laws of a common
government, finds in the productions of the latter great additional resources of maritime and commercial
enterprise and precious materials of manufacturing industry. The South, in the same intercourse, benefiting by
the agency of the North, sees its agriculture grow and its commerce expand. Turning partly into its own
channels the seamen of the North, it finds its particular navigation invigorated; and[…] it looks forward to the
protection of a maritime strength, to which itself is unequally adapted. The East, in a like intercourse with the
West, already finds[…] a valuable vent for the commodities which it brings from abroad, or manufactures at
home. The West derives from the East supplies requisite to its growth and comfort, and, what is perhaps of
still greater consequence, it must of necessity owe the secure enjoyment of indispensable outlets for its own
productions to the weight, influence, and the future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the Union,
directed by an indissoluble community of interest as one nation.
While, then, every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular interest in union, all the parts
combined cannot fail to find in the united mass of means and efforts greater strength, greater resource,
proportionably greater security from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their peace by foreign
nations; and, what is of inestimable value, they must derive from union an exemption from […] broils and wars
between themselves[…] Hence, likewise, they will avoid the necessity of those overgrown military
establishments which, under any form of government, are inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be
regarded as particularly hostile to republican liberty. In this sense it is that your union ought to be considered
as a main prop of your liberty, and that the love of the one ought to endear to you the preservation of the
other.
[…]
In contemplating the causes which may disturb our Union, it occurs as matter of serious concern that any
ground should have been furnished for characterizing parties by geographical discriminations, Northern and
Southern, Atlantic and Western; whence designing men may endeavor to excite a belief that there is a real
difference of local interests and views. One of the expedients of party to acquire influence within particular
districts is to misrepresent the opinions and aims of other districts. You cannot shield yourselves too much
against the jealousies and heartburnings which spring from these misrepresentations; they tend to render
alien to each other those who ought to be bound together by fraternal affection.
[…]
To the efficacy and permanency of your Union, a government for the whole is indispensable. […] Respect for
[this government’s] authority, compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by
the fundamental maxims of true liberty. The basis of our political systems is the right of the people to make
and to alter their constitutions of government. But the Constitution which at any time exists, till changed by an
explicit and authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all. The very idea of the power and
the right of the people to establish government presupposes the duty of every individual to obey the
established government.
All obstructions to the execution of the laws, all combinations and associations, under whatever plausible
character, with the real design to direct, control, counteract, or awe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of fatal tendency. They serve to
organize faction, to give it an artificial and extraordinary force; to put, in the place of the delegated will of the
nation the will of a party[.]
[…]
However combinations or associations of the above description may now and then answer popular ends, they
are likely, in the course of time and things, to become potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious, and
unprincipled men will be enabled to subvert the power of the people and to usurp for themselves the reins of
government, destroying afterwards the very engines which have lifted them to unjust dominion.
Towards the preservation of your government, and the permanency of your present happy state, it is
requisite, not only that you steadily discountenance irregular oppositions to its acknowledged authority, but
also that you resist with care the spirit of innovation upon its principles, however specious the pretexts. […]
[Remember] that for the efficient management of your common interests, in a country so extensive as ours, a
government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security of liberty is indispensable. Liberty itself
will find in such a government, with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian.
[…]
I have already intimated to you the danger of parties in the State, with particular reference to the founding of
them on geographical discriminations. Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you in the
most solemn manner against the baneful effects of the spirit of party generally.
This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in the strongest passions of the
human mind. It exists under different shapes in all governments, more or less stifled, controlled, or repressed;
but, in those of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness, and is truly their worst enemy.
The alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit of revenge, natural to party
dissension, […] is itself a frightful despotism. But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent
despotism. The disorders and miseries which result gradually incline the minds of men to seek security and
repose in the absolute power of an individual; and sooner or later the chief of some prevailing faction[…] turns
this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation, on the ruins of public liberty.
[…]
[The spirit of party] serves always to distract the public councils and enfeeble the public administration. It
agitates the community with ill-founded jealousies and false alarms, kindles the animosity of one part against
another, foments occasionally riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and corruption,
which finds a facilitated access to the government itself through the channels of party passions. Thus the
policy and the will of one country are subjected to the policy and will of another.
There is an opinion that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the administration of the government
and serve to keep alive the spirit of liberty. This within certain limits is probably true[…] [But] in governments
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. […] A fire not to be quenched, it demands a uniform
vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame, lest, instead of warming, it should consume.
It is important, likewise, that the habits of thinking in a free country should inspire caution in those entrusted
with its administration, to confine themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding in the
exercise of the powers of one department to encroach upon another. […] The necessity of reciprocal checks in
the exercise of political power, by dividing and distributing it into different depositaries, and constituting each
the guardian of the public weal against invasions by the others, has been evinced by experiments ancient and
modern; some of them in our country and under our own eyes. To preserve them must be as necessary as to
institute them.
[…]
Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable
supports. […] Let it simply be asked: Where is the security for property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of
religious obligation desert the oaths which are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice? […] 
Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar structure, reason and
experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle.
It is substantially true that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of popular government.
[…]
Promote then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the general diffusion of knowledge. In
proportion as the structure of a government gives force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion
should be enlightened.
As a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit. […] To facilitate to [your
representatives] the performance of their duty, it is essential that you should practically bear in mind that
towards the payment of debts there must be revenue; that to have revenue there must be taxes[…]
Observe good faith and justice towards all nations; cultivate peace and harmony with all. […] It will be worthy
of a free, enlightened, and at no distant period, a great nation, to give to mankind the magnanimous and too
novel example of a people always guided by an exalted justice and benevolence.
[…]
In the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential than that permanent, inveterate antipathies against
particular nations, and passionate attachments for others, should be excluded; and that, in place of them, just
and amicable feelings towards all should be cultivated. […] Antipathy in one nation against another disposes
each more readily to offer insult and injury, to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty and
intractable, when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur. Hence, frequent collisions, obstinate,
envenomed, and bloody contests.
[…]
So likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another produces a variety of evils. Sympathy for the
favorite nation, facilitating the illusion of an imaginary common interest in cases where no real common
interest exists, and infusing into one the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a participation in the
quarrels and wars of the latter without adequate inducement or justification.
[…]
As avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, such attachments are particularly alarming to the truly
enlightened and independent patriot. How many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic
factions, to practice the arts of seduction, to mislead public opinion, to influence or awe the public councils?
Such an attachment of a small or weak towards a great and powerful nation dooms the former to be the
satellite of the latter.
[…]
The great rule of conduct for us in regard to foreign nations is in extending our commercial relations, to have
with them as little political connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them
be fulfilled with perfect good faith. Here let us stop.
[…]
Our detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a different course. If we remain one
people under an efficient government[,] the period is not far off when we may defy material injury from
external annoyance; when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality we may at any time
resolve upon to be scrupulously respected; when belligerent nations, under the impossibility of making
acquisitions upon us, will not lightly hazard the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as
our interest, guided by justice, shall counsel.
[…]
In offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old and affectionate friend, I dare not hope they will
make the strong and lasting impression I could wish[…] But, if I may even flatter myself that they may be
productive of some partial benefit, some occasional good; that they may now and then recur to moderate the
fury of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs of foreign intrigue, to guard against the impostures of
pretended patriotism; this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare, by which they
have been dictated.
How far in the discharge of my official duties I have been guided by the principles which have been delineated,
the public records and other evidences of my conduct must witness to you and to the world. To myself, the
assurance of my own conscience is, that I have at least believed myself to be guided by them.
[…]
I anticipate with pleasing expectation that retreat in which I promise myself to realize, without alloy, the sweet
enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of my fellow-citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free
government, the ever-favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward, as I trust, of our mutual cares,
labors, and dangers.
United States
19th September, 1796
Geo. Washington
