In the summer of 2012, paleontologists working on a fossil excavation in
Kenya announced that the human race, as we know it, was never alone.
Scientists unveiled pieces of skull and bone that are approximately 2 million
years old. Their discovery confirmed what earlier fossil findings had
introduced as a possible piece of the human origin story: that humankind is
merely one of a number of human-like species, each with its own lifespan.
Every other species has been long extinct, making Homo sapiens, our
species, the sole surviving member of the extended human family. Indeed,
these findings have confirmed that the family was bigger than anyone had
previously imagined.
In conversations about prehistoric evolution, whether humans evolved
from apes, is a common but misleading question. Evolution, at its core, is a
process that spawns a diversity of species. Some are quite similar and some
are quite different. Some strains of evolution take place over millions of
years, while other strains (for example, microorganisms that pass through
multiple generations in the span of a day) take place over a number of
months, even weeks. To track the evolution of various organisms over time is to reveal the natural world’s knack for never putting all of its bones in
one basket, so to speak.
Dating Prehistoric Man: Not as Awkward as It Sounds
A more revealing question, then, is scientists’ inquiry into multiple branches
of the Homo genus. Assembling a “fossil record” over the course of two
centuries, scientists have amassed enough evidence to date the earliest
known appearance of Homo sapiens to about 200,000 years ago. Their
research has also proven that a number of human-like species preceded
and accompanied Homo sapiens on the prehistoric timeline.
The creation and preservation of an accurate fossil record is no easy task.
Bones dug up from the ground don’t often offer much information about
their own age, so paleontologists have developed several methods to
analyze the earth surrounding those bones instead. By inspecting the
proximity of a fossil, one can figure out approximately (sometimes
precisely) when the fossil itself was actually a living organism.
Radiometric dating—the use of technology to detect radioactive elements
to identify the age of whatever those elements are in—is a precise but
limited technique for determining the age of a fossil. The precision of
radiometric dating comes from the fact that radioactive elements have
clear, well-documented decay times (or how long it takes for traces of an
element to disintegrate). Using this technique, scientists can narrow down
the age of a fossil, even one that’s over 50 million years old, to a very close
estimate. Unfortunately, radiometric dating only works when radioactive
elements were present in the first place.
The alternative method of dating fossils is stratigraphy. Based in the
geographic study of layers of sediment that have stacked on top of each
other for ages, stratigraphy includes a host of techniques for analyzing
these various layers to determine the age of objects found wedged within
them.
Simply put: If people find a fossil between two layers of dirt, and they know
how old those layers of dirt are, they can then say the fossil was part of a
living creature between those dates.
Stratigraphy can be difficult to execute in the study of fossils, since dirt
doesn’t always stack up in neatly preserved layers. There are often
interruptions in the layers or portions of sediment that ended up being
mixed together or eroded. Furthermore, the precision of this technique is
said to be relative. Every estimate based on stratigraphic analysis depends
on a comparison between other samples and other estimates.
Yet, by reviewing each other’s evidence and sharing their findings,
researchers are able to make reasonable confirmations of the global fossil
record. Radiometric dating and stratigraphic dating are used to establish
prehistoric records of fossils. Those records are then used to build a logical
timeline for the evolution of many species. When new fossils are dug up, a
fossil record spanning the ages is there to help scientists figure out where
their new discoveries fit into the stories of the earth.
To Err Is Human; to Evolve Is Much More
One of the most fascinating stories, of course, is the prehistory of the
human race.
The National Museum of Natural History puts it eloquently: “While people
used to think that there was a single line of human species, with one
evolving after the other in an inevitable march towards modern humans,
we now know this is not the case. Fossil discoveries show that the human
family tree has many more branches and deeper roots than we knew about
even a couple of decades ago.”
Presenting an interactive display of humanity’s prehistory, the museum
identifies over 15 different species related to humankind. The fossil record
reaches back over 6 million years, marking the earliest known appearance
of a primate species that walked upright. Two million years later, the record
proves the existence of Australopithecus Anamensis, a bipedal species that
was equally adept at walking upright and climbing trees.
Homo habilis, whose fossils date back 2 million years ago, was the earliest
known species of the Homo genus. The age of Homo habilis closely follows
the first known appearance of stone tools. It also coincides with the
existence of at least three other human-like species, ape-like creatures that
also walked upright. The stone tools discovered from these years were
likely used by all of the species, following evolutionary paths that were
similar but far from identical.
Even Homo sapiens, the species encompassing every human being on the
planet right now, were accompanied by similar species. To be exact, at least
four other human species have been added to the fossil record for the past
million years. The simultaneous existence of Homo erectus and Homo
heidelbergensis, Homo floresiensis and Homo neanderthalensis covers a
period when the human races developed much larger brains and began to
form the basis for modern civilization.
One by one, the other races have gone extinct. The hypothesized reasons
range from an inability to adapt to climate change to murder at the hands
of more advanced humans. Disease, physical disadvantages, and natural
disaster have been discussed as possible causes. Some scientists argue that
Neanderthals may have bred with early populations of modern humans,
changing the record of their extinction to one of possible assimilation.
Thus, precise causes for the ascendency of Homo sapiens have yet to be
proven. The fact that fossils represent less than 5% of all known living
species in the history of the world makes it very difficult for even the
brightest paleontologists to gather enough evidence to answer all the
questions they have about the origins of man.
What the world has gained through their work, though, is less a story of
primates transforming into humans than it is the story of humanity’s many
extinguished flames. At the moment, our human race carries the torch for
millions of years of evolution—among species, across continents, and
through the ages.

