Two very famous American comedians have something very interesting in common with
two American presidents. Stephen Colbert and Conan O’Brien, who, as of 2013, are considered
two of the funniest Americans, host their own late night talk shows and are among the funniest
men in the country. They each also have ancestors who were Irish and both have publicly
commented on their Irish pride. President John F. Kennedy was often recognized as the first Irish‐
Catholic man to be the president, and he remains the lone Catholic president in American history.
President Barack Obama also has a family tree whose branches stretch to Ireland, which came as
a surprise to many, even to President Obama. However, not only do all four men have Irish roots,
but each of their respective families also left their homeland for America during one of the most
devastating eras in the history of the small island country of Ireland: The Great Famine.
In the year 1845, the diets of one‐third of the people of Ireland were entirely made up
of potatoes. This illustrates the fact that Ireland was already a country that had greater than
its fair share of poverty even before The Great Famine, which is often referred to as The Irish
Potato Famine in countries outside of Ireland. When a disease often referred to as “potato
blight” started to destroy potato crops, not only in Ireland, but also throughout Europe, the
weight of worry quickly altered the Irish people’s outlook. In 1845, roughly one‐third of the
potatoes grown in Ireland were lost and that was just the start. The next year, three‐quarters
of the crops were wiped out by the blight. The farming was so poor that year that in 1847
many pessimistic potato farmers did not even attempt to grow crops. 1848 saw one‐third of
the pre‐famine average crop haul. And on‐and‐on it went.  
The Great Famine lasted until 1853. Though the crops began to thrive in the countryside
once again that year, the damage had been done. At the start of the famine, Ireland had a
population of around 9 million people, but by its end, nearly twenty‐five percent of the people were
gone. It has been estimated that one million people or more died from starvation and diseases,
while another million orso fled the country in that eight‐year period. Half of the immigrant
population that made its way into the borders of the United States wasfrom Ireland in the 1840s.
One thing Ireland is known for is its bright green, hilly landscape. When the Irish left their
homeland for what they thought would be greener pastures in America, they did so by boat.
Conditions were so poor on those vessels and the travel time was so long that the term “coffin
ship” was coined because a great number of Irish people died on the voyage across the Atlantic
Ocean. Those that survived were so poor that they had little choice but to stay in whatever city
the boat they traveled on docked at.  The urban areas where they ended up settling were very
different from Ireland, for reasons beyond the geography and color of the landscape.
Though the Irish would quickly make up large portions of the populations of major
American cities, such as New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Boston, where almost half the
people were new Irish immigrants, the locals treated them with much hostility. Citizens of these
areas felt a sense of entitlement to resources because they had been there longer and were
more “American” than the Irish. The Irish were easy to pick out of a crowd, too. They spoke with
heavy accents and brought over a very different style of clothing than what most Americans
wore in those days. These characteristics, and the fact that many of them were uneducated and
untrained in any trade or business, made their new neighbors and countrymen scorn them.  
Noticing the influx of people entering the cities, building owners reconfigured their spaces,
making smaller apartments out of bigger ones so as to accommodate more tenants. The Irish had
to pay for their housing out of wages from low‐paying jobs that required back‐breaking work.
Most of the Irish men, if they were able to get work at all, performed physical labor. America was
expanding and needed new roadways, railways, bridges, tunnels, and canals. Many of the Irish
immigrants took jobs in those industries as well as in mining. Still, landlords overcharged Irish
tenants for small living spaces that often lacked ventilation and plumbing. Because money and
food were so scarce, while housing was so expensive, women also had to join in as a tremendous
part of the Irish workforce, taking servants’ jobs as housekeepers, nannies, and maids.  
To make matters worse, when hard economic times hit portions of the country, the Irish
were the last to be employed. Many businesses that did need workers posted signs that said
they were hiring, but added “Irish need not apply” if they did not feel too desperate for laborers.
The sign became so widespread throughout the country that even when it was shortened to just
“INNA,” readers understood exactly what it meant. Examples like these of pure hatred towards
Irish immigrants have drawn comparisons to the American treatment of blacks at that time,
which was still before the Civil War had been fought and the Emancipation Proclamation
written. Though arguments about the origin of the term “Black Irish” vary, some historians
believe it was used to describe a kind of pecking order within the Irish community. The Irish had
been migrating to America before the Great Famine and those who had been in the U.S. longer
had more ample opportunity to gain financial security. Those who fled Ireland and starvation
due to the potato blight, on the other hand, were viewed as members of the lowest class of
people. Thus, when someone was labeled Black Irish, it was a hint at a class association with
African Americans and not an observation of a poor Irishman’s physical characteristics;
regardless of wealth, the majority of Irish immigrants had light hair, eyes, and skin.
Many politicianssought to gain votes off of the newfound hatred of the Irish‐Catholic
immigrants. “Nativists” had campaigned decades prior, though mostly on anti‐Native American
platforms. When the Irish came and the subsequent prejudice against them became commonplace,
Nativists were reenergized. After creating the “American Party,” they actually gave speeches
promising that if they were elected into various offices, they would find a way to close up American
bordersto keep the Irish from entering. The incredible irony about Nativistsisthat none of them
were really native at all; they had simply been in the U.S. a couple of generationslonger than the
Irish, and some even lessthan that. Nevertheless, they were so volatile that they held violent
demonstrationsfrom time to time and lead attacks on Catholic churches. Some Irish immigrant
deaths have been attributed to such outbursts of violence against them.
For the Irish to gain favor in America, it would take violence—both sanctioned by the
government, and not. The Civil War created a ripe opportunity for these political conflicts to
come to a head.  During the war, there were drafts that required men to fight. Draft riots
erupted in New York City because Irish immigrants insisted that the rules of the draft would
draw an unfair number of Irish into service. Still, incredibly, about 140,000 Irishmen enlisted in
the Union Army. After the Union victory, some formerly prejudiced Americans began to view
the Irish as assets to the country, for they had proven their loyalty on the battlefields.
Slowly, but surely, the Irish began to fit into America a little more comfortably. They
began many of the early trade unions, founded police departments, and fire departments, too.  
By the twentieth century, Irish Catholics became a force to be reckoned with in politics.
Boston elected an Irish mayor, James Michael Curley. In the 1920s, one of New York State’s
governors, Al Smith, was Irish. Both he and Mr. Curley set the stage for the rise of John F.
Kennedy to the White House.  
History shows that, from the Great Famine to the coffin ships, from the prejudice to the
Civil War draft, Irish‐Americans have been a resilient bunch. It’s no wonder that the Notre
Dame mascot is called The Fighting Irish.
