Five decades ago today, Americans came to this honored place to lay claim to a promise made
at our founding: “We hold these truths to be self‐evident, that all men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are Life,
Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.”
In 1963, almost 200 years after those words were set to paper, a full century after a great war
was fought and emancipation proclaimed, that promise ‐‐ those truths ‐‐ remained unmet. And
so they came by the thousands from every corner of our country, men and women, young and
old, blacks who longed for freedom and whites who could no longer accept freedom for
themselves while witnessing the subjugation of others.
[…]
On a hot summer day, they assembled here, in our nation’s capital, under the shadow of the
Great Emancipator ‐‐ to offer testimony of injustice, to petition their government for redress,
and to awaken America’s long‐slumbering conscience.
We rightly and best remember Dr. King’s soaring oratory that day, how he gave mighty voice
to the quiet hopes of millions; how he offered a salvation path for oppressed and oppressors
alike. His words belong to the ages, possessing a power and prophecy unmatched in our time.
But we would do well to recall that day itself also belonged to those ordinary people whose
names never appeared in the history books, never got on TV. Many had gone to segregated
schools and sat at segregated lunch counters. They lived in towns where they couldn’t vote
and cities where their votes didn’t matter. They were couples in love who couldn’t marry,
soldiers who fought for freedom abroad that they found denied to them at home. They had
seen loved ones beaten, and children fire‐hosed, and they had every reason to lash out in
anger, or resign themselves to a bitter fate.
And yet they chose a different path. In the face of hatred, they prayed for their tormentors. In
the face of violence, they stood up and sat in, with the moral force of nonviolence. Willingly,
they went to jail to protest unjust laws, their cells swelling with the sound of freedom songs. A
lifetime of indignities had taught them that no man can take away the dignity and grace that
God grants us. They had learned through hard experience what Frederick Douglass once
taught ‐‐ that freedom is not given, it must be won, through struggle and discipline,
persistence and faith.
That was the spirit they brought here that day... That was the spirit that they carried with
them, like a torch, back to their cities and their neighborhoods. That steady flame of
conscience and courage that would sustain them through the campaigns to come ‐‐ through
boycotts and voter registration drives and smaller marches far from the spotlight; through the
loss of four little girls in Birmingham, and the carnage of the Edmund Pettus Bridge, and the
agony of Dallas and California and Memphis. Through setbacks and heartbreaks and gnawing
doubt, that flame of justice flickered; it never died.
And because they kept marching, America changed. Because they marched, a Civil Rights law
was passed. Because they marched, a Voting Rights law was signed. Because they marched,
doors of opportunity and education swung open so their daughters and sons could finally
imagine a life for themselves beyond washing somebody else’s laundry or shining somebody
else’s shoes. Because they marched, city councils changed and state legislatures changed, and
Congress changed, and, yes, eventually, the White House changed.
Because they marched, America became more free and more fair ‐‐ not just for African
Americans, but for women and Latinos, Asians and Native Americans; for Catholics, Jews, and
Muslims; for gays, for Americans with a disability. America changed for you and for me, and
the entire world drew strength from that example.
[…]
Those are the victories they won, with iron wills and hope in their hearts. That is the
transformation that they wrought, with each step of their well‐worn shoes. That’s the debt
that I and millions of Americans owe those […] people who could have given up and given in,
but kept on keeping on, knowing that “weeping may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the
morning.”
On the battlefield of justice, men and women without rank or wealth or title or fame would
liberate us all in ways that our children now take for granted, as people of all colors and creeds
live together and learn together and walk together, and fight alongside one another, and love
one another, and judge one another by the content of our character in this greatest nation on
Earth.
