On August 28, 1963, more than 200,000 Americans gathered in Washington, D.C., for a
political rally known as the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom. Organized by a
number of civil rights and religious groups, the event was designed to shed light on the
political and social challenges African Americans continued to face across the country. The
march, which became a key moment in the growing struggle for civil rights in the United
States, culminated in Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” speech, a spirited call for racial
justice and equality.
BACKGROUND
Twice in American history, more than twenty years apart, a March on Washington was
planned, each intended to dramatize the right of black Americans to political and economic
equality.
DID YOU KNOW?
In addition to Martin Luther King Jr., the March on Washington featured speeches and
performances from John Lewis, Josephine Baker, Mahalia Jackson, Joan Baez and Bob Dylan.
The first march was proposed in 1941 by A. Philip Randolph, president of the Brotherhood of
Sleeping Car Porters. Blacks had benefited less than other groups from New Deal programs
during the Great Depression, and continuing racial discrimination excluded them from defense
jobs in the early 1940s. When President Franklin D. Roosevelt showed little inclination to take
action on the problem, Randolph called for a March on Washington by fifty thousand people.
After repeated efforts to persuade Randolph and his fellow leaders that the march would be
inadvisable, Roosevelt issued Executive Order 8802 in June 1941, forbidding discrimination by
any defense contractors and establishing the Fair Employment Practices Committee (FEPC) to
investigate charges of racial discrimination. The March on Washington was then canceled.
Nearly 2 million blacks were employed in defense work by the end of 1944. Order 8802
represented a limited victory, however; the FEPC went out of existence in 1946.
THE MARCH ON WASHINGTON
As blacks faced continuing discrimination in the postwar years, the March on Washington
group met annually to reiterate blacks’ demands for economic equality. The civil rights
movement of the 1960s transformed the political climate, and in 1963, black leaders began to
plan a new March on Washington, designed specifically to advocate passage of the Civil Rights Act then stalled in Congress. Chaired again by A. Philip Randolph and organized by his longtime
associate, Bayard Rustin, this new March for Jobs and Freedom was expected to attract
100,000 participants. President John F. Kennedy showed as little enthusiasm for the march as
had Roosevelt, but this time the black leaders would not be dissuaded. The National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference put aside their long-standing rivalry, black and white groups across the country
were urged to attend, and elaborate arrangements were made to ensure a harmonious event.
The growing disillusion among some civil rights workers was reflected in a speech planned by
John Lewis of the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee, but in order to preserve the
atmosphere of goodwill, leaders of the march persuaded Lewis to omit his harshest criticisms
of the Kennedy administration.
The march was an unprecedented success. More than 200,000 black and white Americans
shared a joyous day of speeches, songs, and prayers led by a celebrated array of clergymen,
civil rights leaders, politicians, and entertainers. The Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King’s soaring
address climaxed the day; through his eloquence, the phrase “I Have a Dream” became an
expression of the highest aspirations of the civil rights movement.
Like its predecessor, the March on Washington of 1963 was followed by years of disillusion
and racial strife. Nevertheless, both marches represented an affirmation of hope, of belief in
the democratic process, and of faith in the capacity of blacks and whites to work together for
racial equality.
