Residents of Los Angeles, California, must deal with gridlock traffic every day. It can take
up to an hour to get from the east side of the city to the west side, especially during rush hour,
which can last up to three hours. Over the past decade, the city government has made legislative
inroads in expanding and building public transportation, in part, in order to alleviate the hours
of driving commuters must put in on a daily basis. Car culture in Los Angeles is so pervasive that
many residents oppose the building and expansion of existing subway and bus lines. Some
residents, especially in high‐density housing in Hollywood, have filed official complaints with the
city and housing authority in areas that have been marked by government officials as potential
opportunities for public transportation. One of the major complaints about the expansion of
public transportation in Los Angeles has to do with residents losing their views of the city from
their residences in the hilly neighborhoods just below the Hollywood Hills.
One of the issuesthat plaguestransportation in Los Angelesisthat it is basically necessary
to own a car—due to the city’s sprawl and far‐flung neighborhoods—in order to get by. Public
transportation in the city consists primarily of an inefficient bus system, which does not run on
a consistent and timely schedule, often getting stuck in the same traffic as cars, and an
incomplete subway system, which is inaccessible to many commuters. For wealthier residents
of Los Angeles, who are able to pay monthly car payments and ever‐rising gas costs, this issue does not hold much importance. However, the issue is a daily problem for Angelenos(that isthe
name of Los Angeles’s inhabitants) who are unable to purchase or rent a car. They must leave
early to get to work on time, and they return home late. The commute bleeds into work‐life
balance, making it difficult to have significant personal or family time after getting home.  
In 2008, city officials put forward Measure R, a piece of legislation that would raise sales
taxes by a half‐cent for 30 years. The measure was then extended in 2012 with the name of
Measure J. The publication The Huffington Post reported that the money would go toward
transportation projects and improvements promoted as a way to “improve the environment by
getting more Angelenos out of their cars and into the region’s growing subway, light rail, and
bus services.” By 2039, Measures R and J will have been responsible for the funding of the
construction or expansion of a dozen rail lines in Los Angeles County. The specific projects that
Measure R is intended to fund include: the “Subway to the Sea,” which will run through Beverly
Hills; the Green Line light rail, which will run to LAX International Airport; the addition of carpool
lanes (accessible only to cars driving two or more people) to major freeways; and the widening
of the I‐5 freeway. Angelenos have met these projects with a variety of emotions: one of the
more notorious reactions has been dissent, even outright hostility.
To those who had initially been opposed to Measure R, a significant event in Los Angeles
transportation history provided some perspective: the so‐called “Carmageddon.” The Sepulveda
Pass is a 10‐mile stretch of the I‐405 freeway, with Sepulveda Boulevard winding along next to
it, which connects drivers to the San Fernando Valley and to the west side of Los Angeles, as
well as Mulholland Drive. As part of the Sepulveda Pass Improvements Project, the I‐405 was
closed on the Sepulveda Pass to all driversfor an entire weekend in 2011 in order to expand one
of the bridges that connects Mulholland Drive across the hills of the Santa Monica Mountain
range. The expansion was necessary in order to introduce an extra lane to the I‐405, a project
intended to alleviate the high levels of traffic that occur in the Sepulveda Pass on an almost hourly basis. The weekend closure would be mimicked almost exactly a year later, during the
summer of 2012, in order to do more roadwork.  
   The lead‐up to “Carmageddon” was feverish: then‐Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa urged
residents to get out of town, or at least to stay off the roads; billboards were posted up all over
the city letting Angelenos know about the coming closure; radio statements were made by all the
major radio personalities; one airline offered four‐dollar plane rides from Los Angeles to Orange
County; bike groupssponsored cross‐city excursions; helicopter companies offered half‐hour long
discounted rides to see the construction in action from the air; and local bars and restaurants
offered “Carmageddon” specials, which included special dishes and discounts on food and drink.
The Los Angeles Police Department was brought in to ensure drivers did not sneak onto the
freeway or onto Sepulveda.  
In both the San Fernando Valley and the west side of Los Angeles, residents were
interviewed and questioned about their experience of “Carmaggedon” and what their plans
were for the weekend.  
“I’m just going to take the Mayor’s advice and get out of town!” a man living in Sherman
Oaks told reporters. He was planning on going to Las Vegas for the weekend, to soak up some
sun and do some gambling.  
“The mayor did local business a real disservice, by making that statement,” T. Donovan, an
employee at a popular cheese and charcuterie store in the Valley,told reporters,shaking his head.
“This could have been a really great opportunity to jumpstart community and neighborhood
spirits.” His store was offering a “Carmaggedon” sandwich, which included ingredients sourced
from farms west of the Los Angeles city center and away from the Sepulveda Pass.
Because of the furor leading up to the weekend, the lack of tension shocked many people
when the closure actually occurred. People weren’t even driving on freeways and streets
unaffected by the closure. The streets were, for once, close to empty and free from traffic. In a sense, it was as if a breath of fresh air had descended on the city. People realized that maybe
they didn’t need cars to survive in Los Angeles. This realization only strengthened the response
to the need for public transportation in Los Angeles.
A year later, in 2012, the second closure was scheduled for another summer weekend.
This time, there was little hullaballoo about the closure: the term “Carmageddon” had been just
about forgotten. Instead, Angelenos seemed to welcome the respite from reliance on cars and
traffic that the closure afforded them. More residents stayed in the city the second time the
closure occurred, and a much more relaxed attitude was palpable: airlines did not offer hour‐
long lifts across the county, and helicopter tours were not advertised.  
Perhaps residents’ experience with both years of closures will pave the way for more
support for public transport and maybe even more transportation legislation. One thing is clear,
though: Los Angeles is in dire need of a solution to its traffic problem. The sooner this fact is
accepted, the sooner change will occur.
