If you think planting false memories only happens in the movies, think again. False memories
happen all the time in humans—we frequently misremember how, when, and why certain
things happened. We misremember small details, but also major events. Often we
misremember things that happened only recently. Now scientists are on the path to finding a
better means of understanding why false memories happen to people, by learning how to
plant them in the first place.  
According to James Gorman in an article in the New York Times in 2013, researchers are
already able in experiments to convince humans to remember certain words and images
inaccurately. A recent study by scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
took this process a step further by planting entirely false memories in mice.  
Though mice and humans are very different creatures, their memory formation processes are
similar. Studying the memories of mice has helped researchers understand exactly what goes
on in the brain during the formation of fake memories.  
A team of scientists at MIT, who published their findings in the journal Science, found that
mice could be convinced of having been shocked in a certain location when they had not in
fact been shocked there.
The scientists first allowed a group of mice to become comfortable in a certain area without
being shocked. They then introduced the mice to a second area where they received shocks,
while stimulating the parts of their brains that had become activated while exploring the first
area in peace. Next they put the mice back in the original area. The mice froze in fear of being
shocked, though they had no actual memory of being shocked there. The activation of the
brain cells while shocks were being delivered was enough to convince the mice that they had
been shocked there before even though they had not.  
According to Joel N. Shurkin with the news service “Inside Science,” these false memories are
as powerful and seemingly real as actual memories. At the same time, it is worth considering
whether a human, with greater awareness and context than a mouse, would somehow be less
easily convinced by the implantation of false memories.  Still, this process reveals how easy it
is to toy with the idea of “reality.”  
This experiment and its conclusions further the understanding ofspecifically how and where
memory formation occursin the brain. Norwegian scientist Dr. Edvard I. Moser, who was not
involved in the experiment but commented on it later for the Times,said thisisthe closest we have
ever come to being able to point to a specific part of the brain and say it isresponsible for memory.  
Additionally, the ability to plant and further understand memory formation and how easy it is
to create false memories helps us understand that memory is actually a very unreliable tool.
This is useful for humans to know as memory is used in many different ways, including witness
testimony in court cases. In fact, witness testimony relies entirely on a person’s ability to
remember events.  
Shurkin quotes a statistic from an organization called the Innocence Project to highlight how
serious this matter is when it comes to court testimony:  
...eyewitness testimony played a role in 75 percent of guilty verdicts eventually
overturned by DNA testing after people spent years in prison. Some prisoners
may have even been executed due to false eyewitness testimony. It was not
because the witnesses were lying.
In fact, the witnesses were just wrong without even realizing it. Someone who is convinced of
a false memory believes it entirely to be true. This new information has the potential to
forever change how we understand eyewitness testimony and general court proceedings.
While it may be scary to consider how unreliable our memories can be, researchers agree
there is certainly a plus side to this new research. According to the authors of the study, “This
type of research could one day help treat some emotional problems, such as post‐traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), which involves the intrusion of unwanted memories.” The ability to
play with humans’ memories gives us much more power over the way we think and cope with
painful memories, and could be key in helping people who suffer from a range of emotional
problems.  
Scientists have also long wondered why false memory creation is so easy in humans in the first
place. Why are humans’ memories so prone to failure? Gorman noted in the Times the ability
for the brain to be flexible and imagine different scenarios could be responsible for a great
deal of human creativity.  
However, this creativity—or the “imagination”—is unique to humans and is a big part of what
makes us human. Unless animals are subjected to false memory experiments like the mice at
MIT, they do not create false memories the way humans do.
