Excerpts from the United States Constitution, Article II
Section 1:
The executive Power shall be vested1 in a President of the United States of America. He shall
hold his Office during the Term of four Years, and, together with the Vice President, chosen for
the same Term, be elected, as follows:
[. . .]
No Person except a natural born Citizen, or a Citizen of the United States, at the time of the
Adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible2 to the Office of President; neither shall any
Person be eligible to that Office who shall not have attained to the Age of thirty five Years, and
been fourteen Years a Resident within the United States.
[. . .]
The President shall, at stated Times, receive for his Services, a Compensation, which shall
neither be increased nor diminished during the Period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that Period any other Emolument [salary or profit] from the
United States, or any of them.
Before he enter on the Execution of his Office, he shall take the following Oath or Affirmation:
‐‐ "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the Office of President of the
United States, and will to the best of my Ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution
of the United States."
Section 2:
The President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of
the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual Service of the United States . . .
He shall have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to make Treaties,
provided two thirds of the Senators present concur3
; and he shall nominate, and by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and
Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States, whose
Appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which shall be established by Law:
but the Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think
proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments.
[. . .]
Section 3:
He shall from time to time give to the Congress Information of the State of the Union, and
recommend to their Consideration such Measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient;
he may, on extraordinary Occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them, and in Case of
Disagreement between them, with Respect to the Time of Adjournment4
, he may adjourn
them to such Time as he shall think proper; he shall receive Ambassadors and other public
Ministers; he shall take Care that the Laws be faithfully executed, and shall Commission all the
Officers of the United States.
Section 4:
The President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States, shall be removed from
Office on Impeachment for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and
Misdemeanors.
Excerpt from the 25th Amendment
Section 1:
In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice
President shall become President
