One way or another, all the events you can recall have an order to them. Or maybe it’s more
accurate to say: You can give order to your own history any way you like. You can think of the
different grades you’ve been in at school. We all understand there’s a difference between
middle school and high school, and between kindergarten and first grade. Each of these years
of school was different in both easy and hard‐to‐notice ways. It may be difficult to remember
the difference between kindergarten and first grade, but you likely remember which grade you
started having different teachers for different subjects.  
School grades are one way of organizing history. In this case, time has been organized for you
by teachers, so that a plan for education unfolds at the right pace. Someone had a certain
progression in mind for you, and so every year your experiences at school changed in different
ways.  
But every person experiences each year differently. Maybe 3rd and 4th grade seem like a blur,
but you can think of ways life was very different living in one town and then moving to live in
another. Places you’ve lived are another way of organizing history. First, you were here; then
you were there; now you’re here.
Drawings you made, trophies you won, notes you passed with friends—all of these come from
different parts of your history, and you can think about them based on how your history is
organized.  
“Oh, yeah. That’s my Youth League soccer trophy. I was goalie on the Mustangs with Dana that
summer. That was in Hoboken, from before we moved to Teaneck.”  
“I was pretty good at watercolors, for a second grader! We had Ms. Stephanie. I thought she
was scary at first, but she told me I could be an artist one day if I paid attention to the way my
colors mixed together.”   
Organizing history allows us to put memories in context, to understand more about something
we remember, see, or find based on when in our history it happened. The ways we organize our
own history are subjective and may change shape over time. But they allow usto step back from
the moment‐to‐momentstream of thingsthat happen to us and understand how we have come
to change, gradually, from a greater perspective.  
That’s exactly what scientists are looking for when they develop ways of measuring natural
history: a way to group many single elementstogetherso that they tell a biggerstory on a longer
scale of time. And just as we might use grades in school on one occasion, and towns we live in
on others, the geologic time scale works well for measuring natural history in some cases, but
in others there may be better alternatives.
That being said, analyzing rock strata is one of the best opportunities out there for using a great
historical organization scheme, for one simple reason—you can see it. The whole concept is
based around the idea you can slice a rock in half—or, better yet, visit a massive exposed rock
formation, like the ones at Monument Valley—and clearly see the different parts of your
historical time scale. And they’re color‐coded—by nature!  
The geologic time scale has got to be one of the simplest, most ingenious applications of
chronography—the measurement of time—to natural science. All the ideas it’s based on are
amazingly,smack‐yourself‐in‐the‐head obviousto ustoday, and yet they have huge implications
for the way we’re able to tell how old something in the natural landscape really is—including
living organisms, dinosaurs and whole continents.
For example: The idea that layers of rock laid on top of each other go from youngest to oldest
as we burrow further down. It’s so obvious that we barely even think about it, but without a
clear understanding of gravity—and a great deal of observable rock—we could never have come
to rely on this principle so solidly.  
Another genius foundation for the geologic time scale, and one of the most useful, is the
principle of lateral continuity, which says that layers of sediment extend in a consistent manner
in all directions. This means if you find two rocks that have matching patterns of strata, but are
separated by a river, we can safely assume they were once joined. In other words, just by
comparing these beautiful color bars on the side of the rock, we know the river between them
wasn’t always there.  
It’s a great example of how ways of measuring history can tell us about so much more than just
the objects they’re measuring. By examining the composition of each layer of sediment, we
come to know more about what the atmosphere and other climatic conditions were like at
different times of the earth’s history.  
By looking at what fossils are present at which layers of sediment, we learn more about when,
and in many cases how, certain species came to be extinct. The geologic time scale is what allows
us to describe different eras leading up to, during, and after the time dinosaurs roamed the
earth. The precise event that’s believed to have caused their extinction—called the K‐Pg event—
is marked by a thin layer of sediment that contains iridium. Iridium is rare in the earth’s crust
but is commonly found as part of asteroids. The sedimentary layer marking the K‐Pg event
helped scientists figure out the most accepted theory of why dinosaurs became extinct. And
they know thisfrom looking at rocksthat are readily available today, but hold information about
the world millions of years ago. All because it’s the same world!
Of course, not all rock is so fixed that we can observe its inner layers millions of years later,
relatively untouched. Plate tectonics remind us of that. Shifting rock, and the shapes it makes
result in the creation of new ocean floors, and we realize that oceans are defined so much more
by the floor beneath them than by all the water they contain. That’s a radical idea worth
repeating for a moment: Oceans are defined by the floor beneath them, not only by the water
they contain. When plates shift and new ground emerges, the dynamic of the waters around it
changestoo. Meanwhile, the earth’ssize remains constant, and as new oceans emerge, old ones
are overtaken.
The ways we organize our own history can tell us a great deal about our lives and help us
understand the progression of events in a much broader, more insightful way. But every
characteristic that has meaning, whether it’s the town we live in, the grade we’re in, or the
teachers and parents we have, will only continue to have meaning in the future. Opportunities
open and close, in the wake of shifting plates. Forces far outside our view but fundamental to
our lives are constantly in motion. Even the oceans we swim in come to be and disappear on an
invisible schedule.
