Sketches or drawings can help people communicate to others ideas about how to solve
problems, big or small. Drawings make ideas visual, so they are easier to understand than a
spoken or written explanation, and using them allows for many different drafts to be
presented before deciding on a final product.  
When a hurricane hit New York City in 2012, the city realized it was not prepared to handle
such a disaster. The hurricane damaged the city badly and left many people without homes.
Sea levels were going to continue to rise, which meant potential for more hurricanes and
flooding, and the government realized it had to change some things about the city to make it
better able to handle future disasters.
Rather than simply begin building bigger, stronger structures, like a giant wall around the city
or a gate to keep water out, people started sketching out their ideas about how to make New
York a place that could better withstand hurricanes. These people were experts chosen to take
on the task of re‐imagining the city. By using drawings, people were able to debate these
ideas, decide which ones were best and change them as they saw fit. Drawings also allowed
experts in certain areas to show and explain things to people who didn’t know as much as
them about those subjects.
Some people focused on how to change the city’s natural environment, like the grassy areas
next to the ocean, to make them more hurricane‐friendly. They drew and presented sketches
that showed how these areas could be used to absorb seawater. They also drew in things that
could be planted to grow better in the changing environment, like plants that can withstand
seawater.
Others focused on important city buildings like hospitals. Hospitals in New York City were hit
hard by the hurricane, and many people struggled to get the emergency care and basic
medical help they needed during the disaster. The experts’ drawings focused on ways to make
hospital buildings stronger so that they could meet people’s needs even in a crisis.  
Others looked at how to improve public transportation, which is very important to keeping the
city running. After the hurricane, many people in the city were stranded with no way to get
around because the train system was badly affected by the storm. Transportation experts
drew up ways to pump water out of train tunnels more quickly and get trains up and running
sooner.  
People brought their drawings together and looked at all the ways to improve the city. Some
ideas had to be rejected and replaced by more useful ones. The experts presented their ideas
to the public at meetings because these changes would affect everyone living in the city and
they wanted the citizens to be engaged in the process.
Finally the city was able to decide on a plan it would use to start making the city stronger, and
it used these sketches and representations to figure out other things, like how much it would
cost the city, how many workers would be needed and how long the construction projects
might take. Using the teamwork of many experts and sketch artists, the city was able to begin
planning New York City’s future and work toward preventing potential dangers.
