Silk scarves, silk dresses, silk ties all sell like hot cakes around the world. Silk has been a
highly desired commodity since ancient times, traced back to 3500 B.C. in China. Due to its
popularity in luxury clothing items, silk soon spread to all parts of Asia, and eventually, the
world. You wouldn’t think such a valued material originally comes from small, white worms.  
The Bombyx mori, or mulberry silkworm, is famous for producing the treasured textile.
Northern Thailand is known for its numerous silkworm farms where locals collect the silk from
thousands of worms to weave into beautiful fabrics to sell all over the world. The entire
process can be very tedious, but the selling price of silk can be very high, so the processing of
silk is deemed worth the time.  
As soon as silkworms hatch from their tiny eggs, they begin to rapidly feed on mulberry
leaves to gain weight. Silkworms must multiply their size by 10,000 times in order to become
silk‐producing larvae. That means that if they were human, they would weigh 70,000 pounds
each by the time they were a month old. After 40 full days and nights of eating these fresh,
hand‐picked leaves, they are ready to begin weaving a cocoon around themselves to mature
into moths. In fact, each silk cocoon is made out of one long string of worm spit, spanning the
length of almost half a mile, or nearly a kilometer. The worms need three to four days to fully
finish forming the cocoon. Once this process is complete, the cocoons are collected and boiled
for about five minutes in water—and yes, the worm is still inside the cocoon, which several
animal activists disapprove of since the boiling kills the insect. After soaking, manufacturers find strands with a small needle and spin several together to produce one thread of silk.
Clearly, it’s a very lengthy and tedious process.  
Researchers have made attempts to extract silk strands from living silk worms in order
to quell activists’ complaints, but the worms resist and grip the strands even harder, causing
them to break. Researchers have found that when a silkworm is injured, it enters a state of
self‐imposed paralysis, since the act of moving would make the injury worsen. At Oxford
University in England, they have found the exact chemical that induces this paralysis in order
to inject it into the worms to temporarily restrict the worms’ movement. However, the
paralysis does not mean that the insects are unconscious—scientists believe the worms are
semi‐conscious in this state, meaning they may be aware of their involuntary paralysis.
Therefore, the two options for silk production are to boil the worms alive or temporarily
paralyze them while producers extract the strands of their cocoon.  
Despite the slight controversy over silk extraction, the silk industry continues to thrive.
China produces 58,000 tons of silk each year. Yet one of the most popular silk companies in
the world is Jim Thompson, a brand based in Thailand. Thompson, a Delaware native, trained
to be an architect in the mid‐1920s, but joined the United States army in the early 1940s in
response to the rise of World War II. He was soon appointed to the Office of Strategic Services
(which eventually became the CIA) and traveled around the world, including Thailand, where
he fell in love with the people and their country. There were few hotels that accommodated
international travelers in the capital of Bangkok, and Thompson thought that with the rise of
leisure travel, the Far East would make an appealing destination for Westerners. Upon his
discharge from the military in 1946, he returned to Thailand to start his own silk business.  
At the time, silk was mainly being produced in the northeast of Thailand, but due to the
tediousness of the collection process, silk production was on the decline. Thompson was
determined to revive the business, so in 1947, he took a variety of silk threads back to New
York City to see if the product would be marketable to foreign consumers. He received a
positive response, so the Jim Thompson Silk Company was founded in 1948.  
Jim Thompson is credited for reviving the silk industry. After the establishment of his
company, silk costumes soon appeared in Broadway plays and popular films such as Ben Hur,
and Thai royalty, such as Her Majesty Queen Sirikit, began wearing silk often. Many also
attribute his work to greatly improving the Thai economy, since the silk industry continues to
employ thousands of Thai citizens even today.  
Jim Thompson’s success is no mystery. However, his disappearance on March 26, 1967
certainly is one. Thompson made a trip to Malaysia to visit friends and one day, ventured into
the jungle on an afternoon stroll. He was never seen again despite search parties sent out by the
Royal Army Air Corps and British troops. Many have their own theories on his disappearance,
but none have been completely confirmed.
