INDEPENDENCE
The Seven Years’ War had left Great Britain with a huge debt by the standards of the day.
Moreover, thanks in part to Pontiac’s Rebellion, a massive American Indian uprising in the
territories won from France, the British decided to keep an army in postwar North America.
Surely the colonists could help pay for that army and a few other expenses of administering
Britain’s much enlarged American empire. Rather than request help from provincial
legislatures, however, Britain decided to raise the necessary money by acts of Parliament.
Two laws, the Sugar Act (1764) and the Stamp Act (1765), began the conflict between London
and America. The Sugar Act imposed duties on certain imports not, as in the past, to affect the
course of trade—for example, by making it more expensive for colonists to import molasses
from the non‐British than from the British West Indies—but to raise a revenue in America “for
defraying the expense of defending, protecting, and securing the same.” The Stamp Act levied
entirely new excise taxes (like sales taxes) in America on pamphlets, almanacs, newspapers
and newspaper advertisements, playing cards, dice, and a wide range of legal and commercial
documents. Those accused of violating the Stamp Act would be tried in Admiralty Courts,
which had no juries and whose jurisdiction normally pertained to maritime affairs. The
colonists protested that provision because it violated their right to trial by jury. Above all,
however, they insisted that both acts levied taxes on them and that, under the old English
principle of “no taxation without representation,” Parliament had no right to tax the colonists
because they had no representatives in the House of Commons.
British spokesmen did not question the principle but argued that the colonists, like many
Englishmen in places that could not send delegates to Parliament, were “virtually” represented in
Parliament because its members sought the good of the British people everywhere, not just of
those who chose them. That made no sense to the Americans, who lived in a young society
where representation was generally tied to population and voters expected their representatives
to know and defend their interests. A legislator could not represent people who did not choose
him, they argued. It was as simple as that.
Several colonies unsuccessfully petitioned Parliament against the Sugar and Stamp Acts. A
Stamp Act Congress of delegates from nine colonies met in New York in October 1765, passed
resolutions asserting their rights, and petitioned the king, the Lords, and the Commons for
redress of their grievances. What else could the colonists do? Allowing the Stamp Act to go
into effect would create a precedent for new taxes, which Parliament would surely approve
again and again because every tax on the Americans relieved them and their constituents of
that financial burden.
Boston led the way. On August 14 and 15, 1765, a popular uprising there forced the
Massachusetts stamp collector, Andrew Oliver, to resign his office. That meant there was
nobody in the colony to distribute stamps or collect the taxes. With a minimum of force, the
Stamp Act had been effectively nullified in Massachusetts. Soon other colonies’ stampmen
resigned to avoid Oliver’s fate. In the end, the Stamp Act went into effect only in remote
Georgia for a brief time. In the spring of 1766, Parliament repealed the Stamp Act, but it also
passed a Declaratory Act that said Parliament had the right to bind the colonies “in all cases
whatsoever.”
As if to affirm that right, in 1767 the new chancellor of the exchequer, Charles Townshend,
persuaded Parliament to pass an act levying new duties on glass, lead, paint, paper, and tea
imported into the American colonies to help pay for the colonies’ defense and also to pay
royal officials who had previously been dependent on provincial assemblies for their salaries.
Those “Townshend duties” sparked a second wave of opposition. In an effort to avoid further
violence within America, the colonists organized non‐importation associations to build
pressure for repeal of the duties among those manufacturers and merchants in Britain who
suffered from the decline in exports to America. Only men signed the associations, but women
often supported the effort by making homespun cloth to replace British textiles and seeking
alternatives to imported tea. Exports to America declined enough that in 1770 Parliament
repealed most of the Townshend duties, retaining only the one on tea.
That led to a third crisis in 1773, when Parliament passed a Tea Act to help the financially
strapped East India Company (EIC) sell its surplus tea in America. The Tea Act did not impose a
new tax. It refunded to the EIC duties collected in Britain and allowed the company to sell tea
in America through its own agents (or “consignees”) rather than through independent
merchants. The king’s minister, Lord North, who proposed the act, thought that the Tea Act
would allow the EIC to price its tea low enough to compete with smugglers of cheap Dutch tea.
The act also gave the EIC a monopoly of the American market, which caused discontent among
colonial merchants cut out of the tea trade and others who feared that more monopolies would follow if this one became established. More important, Lord North insisted on retaining
the old Townshend duty on tea. He did not anticipate how much opposition that would
provoke from colonists determined to resist all taxes imposed upon them by Parliament.
The first tea ship, the Dartmouth, arrived in Boston on November 28, 1773. For several weeks
thereafter, a mass meeting of “the Body of the People,” whose members came from Boston
and several nearby towns, tried unsuccessfully to get the consignees to resign and to secure
permission from customs officials and the royal governor for the ships to leave the harbor and
take their tea back to England. (In Philadelphia and New York, the consignees resigned and the
tea ships were successfully sent back to England with the tea chests still on board.) Finally, on
December 16, the night before the tea became subject to seizure by customsmen, to whom
the consignees would surely pay the duty, a group of men disguised as Indians threw 342
chests of tea into the harbor.
An angry Parliament responded to the “Boston Tea Party” in 1774 by passing a series of
Coercive Acts that the colonists soon called the “Intolerable Acts.” They closed Boston Harbor
(the Port Act); nullified the Massachusetts Charter of 1691 and instituted a new government
with greater royal control (the Massachusetts Government Act); and allowed royal officials
accused of committing felonies while executing their offices in Massachusetts to be tried in
England (the Administration of Justice Act). The fourth Coercive Act, a new Quartering Act,
facilitated housing troops where they could be used against colonial civilians. Soon the king
appointed General Thomas Gage, head of the British army in North America, as governor of
Massachusetts, and essentially put the province under military rule.
If the Coercive Acts were meant to isolate Massachusetts, they failed; the other colonies
rallied to its defense. A Continental Congress met in Philadelphia (September 5–October 26,
1774), adopted a statement of rights, demanded the repeal of several acts of Parliament
including the “unconstitutional” Coercive Acts, advised the people of Massachusetts to act in
self defense, and approved a comprehensive program of economic sanctions against Britain
(the “Continental Association”) that would be enforced by elected local committees. It also
called a second Continental Congress to meet on May 10, 1775, if the Americans’ grievances
had not yet been redressed. By then, however, war between provincial and regular soldiers
had begun at Lexington and Concord in Massachusetts (April 19, 1775).
The Second Continental Congress again petitioned the king for redress of grievances and
assured him of the colonists’ loyalty. Nonetheless, in a proclamation in August and again in a
speech to Parliament in October 1775, King George III said that the Americans were seeking independence. Their professions of loyalty, he claimed, were “meant only to amuse,” that is,
to mislead. He had already decided that only force could end the conflict. In November, Lord
Dunmore, the royal governor of Virginia, offered freedom to slaves who fled to the British
lines. That further alienated white planters. And in December, the king signed a Prohibitory
Act that put American shipping on the same status as that of enemy nations, effectively
putting the American colonists outside his protection. Soon he began negotiating with German
princes to hire soldiers to help put down the American “rebellion.” Those actions drove more
and more Americans toward the independence that the king sought to prevent.
Some colonists—roughly 20 percent of the population—remained loyal to the Crown. Those
“loyalists” included farmers and artisans of modest means as well as wealthy merchants and
planters. One group, however, was represented among loyalists out of proportion to its
incidence in the population as a whole: British officeholders, from sheriffs to royal governors.
Other loyalists lived in areas cut off from the flow of information, and so were not driven by
events to reconsider their allegiance, or they had reason to think their liberty and interests
would be better served under the Crown than in a government controlled by the majority of
their white male neighbors. Many members of the Church of England who lived in
Congregationalist Connecticut drew that conclusion. So did the unassimilated members of
several ethnic minorities and those slaves who flocked into British lines.
By the spring of 1776, however, even many reluctant colonists thought they had no choice.
They could declare their independence and secure foreign help, probably from France,
Britain’s old enemy, or they would be crushed. On July 2, Congress, confident that it had the
support of the people, approved a resolution that “these united colonies are, and of right
ought to be, free and independent States,” then spent much of the next two days editing a
draft declaration of independence. On July 4, it approved the text by which the United States
claimed a “separate and equal station” among “the powers of the earth,” free of that
allegiance to the Crown and state of Great Britain that had for so long been a cause of
profound pride among the British colonists of North America.
