There is a place called the Araripe Basin in a remote, sparsely populated region of
northeastern Brazil. Arid but beautiful, it can be a difficult place for farmers to grow crops. But
the earth provides another bounty: fossils. And among the bevy of bones are some rare finds
— including 23 species of extinct flying reptiles called pterosaurs.
More than three decades ago, a local there found some large pterosaur bones. He delivered
them to the Museu Nacional in Rio de Janeiro, where they were tucked away in a drawer. As it
happens, many natural history museums have a trove of unexamined fossils awaiting study in
their collections — there are just too many to go through. But a few years ago, paleontologist
Alexander Kellner, a research associate at the American Museum of Natural History who as a
doctoral student trained with Curators John Maisey and Malcolm McKenna, found the time to
examine the 30-plus-year-old fossil finds at the Rio museum, where he is now a curator.
Before studying the bones, Kellner had to dissolve the calcereous “nodules” of rock in which
the bones were entombed by sinking the fossils into buckets of formic acid. Using a pneumatic
hammer, specialists at the museum gradually freed a partial skeleton of the animal from its
stony home.
It included part of the animal’s skull, complete with a bony crest at
the tip of its nose, vertebrae, pelvis — and, perhaps most
dramatically, arm and wing-bones. The wingspan of this pterosaur
was, the research team concluded, nearly 27 feet — the largest
pterosaur discovered so far in the Southern Hemisphere. A model of
this recently described giant specimen, from the species
Tropeognathus mesembrinus, flies overhead at the entrance to the
special exhibition Pterosaurs: Flight in the Age of Dinosaurs,
overseen by Curator Mark Norell with Kellner as co-curator.
Not a Bird, Not a Dinosaur
What is a pterosaur? It sounds like such a simple question.
But the answer was by no means obvious when the first
pterosaur skeleton was discovered in the mid-1700s, in the
Solnhofen limestone quarry in Germany. Perhaps, early
observers theorized, that specimen’s long skinny arm-andfinger
bones were for swimming? Or was it some kind of
toothed, clawed, winged bird? Or even a mammal?
Debates raged, even after 1801, when the great French
anatomist Georges Cuvier analyzed drawings of the
skeleton and determined the animal to be something new
to science: a flying reptile that Cuvier later named pterodactyle
(wing finger in Greek), whose wings were composed of a shortened upper arm bone,
along with a dramatically elongated fourth finger that likely supported a wing membrane.
Since Cuvier’s time, the fossil record has revealed much more about these extinct reptiles,
which lived from about 220 million years ago to the end of the late Cretaceous period 66
million years ago, disappearing at the same time as large dinosaurs in a mass extinction event.
Still, although pterosaurs may often be grouped with dinosaurs in children’s picture books,
they are not dinosaurs.
“Dinosaurs are characterized by a set of anatomical features pterosaurs don’t have,” explains
Norell, including a hole in the hip socket. Today’s scientific consensus is that pterosaurs are
nonetheless more closely related to dinosaurs, whose living
descendants are birds, than to any other group, including the
next-closest, crocodiles.
What is also clear is that pterosaurs were the first vertebrates
to fly — an amazing feat. Tiny, invertebrate insects had long
since taken to the air, but nothing as large as a four-legged
vertebrate had attempted such a thing.
“They are the most fabulous creatures that ever existed! I am
not exaggerating,” says Kellner. “They made the first attempts
among vertebrates to conquer the air — they were the first to
develop powered flight,” that is, the type of sustained flight that evolved, later and
independently, in birds and bats.
Still, many mysteries remain. What type of material covered their skin? Was it hair, or
feathers, or something in between? What did they eat, and how did they hunt? Many
pterosaurs had flesh-and-bone crests atop their skulls — dramatic anatomical characteristics
whose purpose is still debated by paleontologists.
Unlike dinosaurs, whose living descendants are modern birds, pterosaurs left no heirs when
they disappeared from Earth. That means paleontologists have no living analogs to draw from
as they make inferences about pterosaur behavior. Nonetheless, in the past decade or two,
there has been a resurgence of pterosaur research and synthesis, as new methods of
examining fossils, such as computed tomography (CT) scanning and UV lighting to discern
heretofore invisible details, have become commonplace; as researchers share data digitally;
and as researchers begin to find new fossils in previously unexplored locales, including China
and Brazil.
Fossils Reveal Diversity
Pterosaur bones have been found on every continent including Antarctica. Although all
pterosaurs share the wing anatomy in which the upper-arm bone (humerus) and elongated
fourth digit form the truss of the wing membrane, the wing shapes are quite diverse: from
long, thin soaring wings like those of an albatross to short, stubby wings that might have
allowed for more frequent flapping flight, like that of a cardinal. Some early pterosaurs had peg-like teeth seen in living reptiles, while many others were toothless. Early pterosaurs often
had long tails that they might have used as airborne rudders, while later species have a short
tail or no tail at all.
Crazy Crests
The incredible diversity of pterosaurs is perhaps best expressed in one of the prehistoric flying
reptile’s most intriguing and mysterious features: the head crest.
Akin to a rooster’s comb, peacock’s crown, or the frill on some lizards’ necks, pterosaur crests
were prominent anatomical features found across many species. But rather than flesh or
feathers, these reptiles’ crests were made at least in part of bone — a boon to paleontologists,
as hard bone tends to be preserved as a fossil. Recent research also indicates that other hornlike
material comprised part or even most of some pterosaur crests, with the thin, underlying
bony structure supporting sometimes expansive membranes. Pterosaurs crests are thought to
have been fairly ubiquitous, appearing in many groups of pterosaurs from the Triassic (252–
201 million years ago) through the Jurassic (201–145 million years ago) and Cretaceous (145–
66 million years ago) periods. In terms of size and dramatic effect, crests peaked in the Late
Cretaceous, when the biggest pterosaurs also evolved.
Among pterosaur species known to have had crests, there is an amazing range of shapes and
sizes. Pteranodon sternbergi, for example, had a high upright crest on its skull; Pteranodon
longiceps, dagger-shaped blades at the back of its head; and Nyctosaurus, a fan-like structure
at the rear of its head. Dsungaripterus weii had two: a long, low crest on its snout and a short
crest rising above the back of the head. The Anhanguera species had rounded disk shapes on
both upper and lower jaws, while Gnathosaurus pterosaurs had long, low ridges running down the middle of their heads. Tupandactylus imperator had huge sail-like extensions that dwarfed
the rest of its head.
Could something so flashy be all form and no function? The heavier crests cost the reptiles a
lot in energy to grow and carry around. Reason suggests if they weren’t useful, they would
have disappeared over millions of years of evolution. But just what that use was is a question
that puzzles pterosaurologists to this day.
There are competing theories, chief among them that crests serve as a form of species
identification. Other possibilities include a role in sexual selection, heat regulation, as a rudder in flight, or as a keel in the water, stabilizing the reptile as it dove or skimmed for food. The
discovery in Brazil of wildly different crests among closely related species lends credibility to
the theory of species identification: like a Mesozoic mohawk, a distinct crest would allow
ready recognition of one’s own kind and, equally important, rule out others.
Were the crests as brightly colored as shown in artists’ renderings? While scientists cannot
know for certain, light and dark bands of color on the rare preserved tissue of a Pterorhynchus
wellnhoferi crest found in China led to speculation that crests might indeed have been highly
colored, especially if they served to communicate identity or attract mates.
Still, without living descendants for comparison and the relative scarcity of fossils, definitive
proof has been elusive — so far.
