When two organisms create a third organism through reproduction, a number of variables come
into play. It’s a sort of complex lottery in which the third organism—the offspring of the first
two—inherits a combination of the parent organisms’ genetic material. The possible variations
inherent in recombining the parents’ DNA are very, very broad and infinitely larger than the pool
of entries in the state lotto jackpot! That’s why we get so much variation even within the
population of a particular sexually reproducing species.
Each new organism receives two of each chromosome, and within those chromosomes, two
versions of each parents’ set of genes. These genes contain instructions for protein production
within the body of the offspring, and the way those proteins are prescribed determinesthe traits
of the offspring. So, although your unique collection of traits, the combination of characteristics,
physical and otherwise, that make you uniquely yourself are originally the product of chance,
there are machinations going on behind the scenes to which every freckle, hair and character
trait can be traced.
Personality traits are another story altogether. When we think about how our personalities are
formed, we can certainly think about genes we acquired from our parents—but we also have to
think about other complexly intertwined factorslike environment and upbringing. For now, we’ll
simplify things by just focusing on the physical aspect of inherited traits. For example, if both
parents exhibit the trait of red hair, their offspring have a greater chance of acquiring the genes
that code for red hair. Certain traits are characteristically dominant or recessive, depending on
the makeup of their alleles. This can make predicting traits tricky, but it is still very possible to
estimate the likelihood, even the mathematic probability, that certain traits will manifest in the
offspring of partners who exhibit those traits.  
Red hair happens to be a kind of gene called incomplete dominant, which means it will blend
with other genes, rather than dominate or be dominated. Since this is the case, the likeliest
candidate to be coded for red hair is offspring with two red‐headed parents.
It would be very, very unlikely for two parents with identically coded chromosomes to sexually
reproduce. Even in the case of intrafamilial (or consanguine) pairings, which are discouraged in
our society, the chromosome pairings would never be perfectly identical—that’s a good thing
for us as a civilization! As you will see, the absolute worst thing for our survival is for like to be
paired with likes. It’sin the best interests of our population that lots of different genes get mixed
together in an evolutionary soup, so that many new variations on living organisms can be
exposed to the environment, develop new adaptationsto changing conditions, and promote the
survival of the species.
Another variable that lets organism populations adapt to changing environments is mutation in
genes. Sometimes, unpredictable changes in genetic code will appear within a new generation,
not traceable back to a parental source.
Creators of superheroes like the X‐Men and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles have used the idea
of extreme mutation as a narrative device to invent colorful characters, bizarre scenarios, and
literary metaphors. Mutant and mutation have exciting, exotic connotations to us, but actually,
mutation is simply a necessary part of a species’ evolution. Mutation can be something as
mundane as two parents with brown eyes giving birth to a child with hazel eyes; or a type of
moth whose wings are a different color from all the other moths in that species. Mutations are
where new adaptations to existing or dynamic conditions are field tested in competition to
whatever has worked for a population in the past. If a mutation pops up that happens to be
advantageous for a particular organism within a population, that organism is more likely to
survive, and therefore, more likely to procreate. Eventually, that chance mutation is reflected more widely in the community, and is passed on further to later generations. Once new
challenges appear in the environment, new adaptations are likely to crop up for a fortunate few.  
This is not to say that mutations are always helpful. Sometimes they are simply inconvenient,
odd or unsupportable. They can even be indicative of a disruption in the environment.  
Human interference in genetic coding is a pretty common practice these days. By deliberately
engineering mutations in plants, most often food crops, humans can create larger, more
resilient food sources. Since these “superfoods” are synthetically equipped with attributes that
make them disproportionately competitive in the ecosystem they share with naturally grown
food crops, they pose a threat to those populations. This is a controversial practice many food
activists are working to curb.  
Whether the mutation occurs naturally or is forced upon a population by biogenetic scientists,
mutations are essential to the system by which ecosystems change and grow.
