It was a light, spring Sunday in Brooklyn, New York. Doug and his wife, Eve, were enjoying it
with their copy of the Sunday New York Times newspaper, which they would pleasingly read
section by section over a hearty breakfast of eggs, bacon, and, of course, some warm and soft
New York City bagels.
Both Doug and Eve were hard‐working people, having to commute by subway throughout the
week into different parts of their neighboring borough of Manhattan where both of their
offices were located. Therefore, they usually took full advantage of their days off by lounging
around their apartment, reading and watching television. This was especially true throughout
the winter, when temperatures were too cold and the skies too cloudy in New York to make
Doug and Eve leave their place if they did not absolutely have to. They could rest and recover
from their long workweek indoors, away from the snow and chilly temperatures, just as well as
they could outside, and probably even better so!
However, this was the first clear and relatively warm day of the year that Doug and Eve could go
outside and enjoy wholeheartedly, without having to bundle up and pile on layers of clothing.
Eve became anxious as the morning neared a close and the afternoon came upon them. She
desperately wanted to go outside exploring and snap photos with her brand new digital camera,
which she had bought just the day before. She was worried that Doug would not be up for such
a trip and he would give the excuse that he was too tired. Eve was also hoping she could coax
Doug into becoming a little more enthusiastic about photography himself, so they could plan fun
photo excursions together. After all, they lived in one of the five boroughs of the city of New
York, which ranks among one of the biggest cities in the world, and is overflowing with countless
images worth capturing on a camera. Eve really loved photographing the city (though she would
not take as many photos in the frigid winter time) and thought getting Doug into it too would
give them an excuse to have some extra fun time together.
“Doug,” Eve began a little tenderly, and nervously. “How about we head into the city today?”
(New Yorkers tend to refer to Manhattan as “the city,” even if they already are residents of the
five boroughs because the island is really its epicenter.)
“What for?” asked Doug, sipping his juice with a puzzled look on his face. Eve sighed. She was
wishing for the conversation to go more smoothly.
“Well, I’d like to take some photos today. It’s beautiful outside! And I thought you’d like to
come along,” she said.
Doug replied with a simple “Oh.” He folded his paper and put it down without much of an
expression.
Eve didn’t know how to react to that. Then, Doug got up and left the room, making Eve
wonder what in the world that meant. Did he want to go? Was he angry at the request?
“What are you doing?” she asked him, projecting her voice down the hall.
“I’ll be right there,” he said.
After a moment, Eve heard Doug’s footsteps reentering their little dining room. She looked up
and saw him smiling, holding two cameras: her brand new one and the other one he had
secretly bought for himself as well.
Doug and Eve left their apartment and began walking the pavement toward the subway stop
they were very familiar with, looking forward to their day of photographing the wonderful
sites of New York City. What they, like most New Yorkers and city dwellers around the world,
probably did not even realize, is they were going to observe all the highlights while being part
of a tremendous ecosystem.
People usually think of an ecosystem as something much more natural than a city with incredibly
tall, manmade buildings on top of concrete that run parallel to streets with zipping vehicles
spewing toxic carbon monoxide into the atmosphere. Typically, the ocean comes to mind as an
example of an ecosystem, or the rain forests of South America, while the African deserts could be
another. However, an ecosystem is simply defined as a community filled with living organisms
that interact with each other and nonliving things within a particular environment. And an urban
ecosystem is actually the one ecosystem that human beings are in fact most familiar with, while
it is also arguably the only ecosystem in the world that is growing.
Like they usually do on Mondays through Fridays when travelling to and from their jobs, Doug
and Eve decided to take a local subway line from their home in Brooklyn to the island of
Manhattan to enjoy their Sunday.
New York City has a massive subway system that helps people get around. The trains travel
above and below ground, over bridges and through tunnels. These electrical behemoths are
vital parts of the city’s ecosystem for they, in effect, help people survive a bit easier than if the
trains did not exist. Human beings are incredibly social creatures. In other words, they
naturally desire communication and companionship with other people. The city’s subways
allow that to happen with much more freedom and ease, not to mention the quicker pace that
is possible compared to the alternatives of a horse‐and‐buggy or walking. Furthermore, the
subways help individuals get to their jobs, allowing them and other people to be productive.
Necessary goods, such as food and supplies, become more easily available to people with
better transportation. Plus, important services like medical treatment and education can be
more easily taken advantage of.
***
Both Doug and Eve took some last minute photos of the incredible Manhattan skyline through
the windows of the subway car before it headed underground, into a tunnel, and through the
East River into the subterranean depths of Manhattan.
***
When Eve and Doug walked upstairs from the subway station onto a Manhattan sidewalk, the
first thing they saw were tremendous skyscrapers standing thousands of feet high. The island
of Manhattan is littered with hundreds of huge buildings that have become world famous for,
not just their height, but also for their recognizable architecture and symbolism of mankind’s
never‐ ending desire to create. Doug and Eve immediately reached for their cameras and
started taking some photos of buildings like the Empire State Building, the Freedom Tower and
the Chrysler Building.
Many of these skyscrapers are essentially incredibly large office spaces. Therefore, the
buildings serve a vital function in the ecosystem in that they house many people throughout
the day, while they are working on any number of projects that could help others. A large
percentage of these buildings are also homes to restaurants and eateries where people not
only enjoy plenty of available nourishing food, but commiserate with each other as well.
One of the drawbacks of so many skyscrapers is that it creates shade. This might sound like a
positive, and it partially is because it gives people relief from the hot rays of the sun. However,
too little exposure to the sun is not a good thing either. The sun is blocked so often from New
York residents by those buildings, that people are not getting enough Vitamin D into their
bodies, because the sun’s rays help build the levels of Vitamin D.
Still, it is important to recognize that these buildings of Manhattan are, in some ways, as
“natural” a thing as an anthill or a bird’s nest. First of all, human beings, who are undoubtedly
a part of nature, have built them, and they have been built by raw materials taken up from the
planet’s resources. Certainly, soil has been covered by concrete and iron, but there are plenty
of places in nature where there is no rich soil, like Antarctica, for instance. The previously hilly
island that had thousands of trees on it has simply been exchanged for an urban ecosystem
containing different things that serve the same function as many others that are called more
“natural.” In addition, skyscrapers still must be built with respect to many laws of nature. An
elite architect along with a construction crew cannot simply erect a building that stretches to
an infinite height. The effects of gravity, wind, and, yes, the density of soil still within the earth
of Manhattan, must be considered in the planning and construction of a building.
***
Eve knew that if she was going to have a successful day of photography, she and her husband
would have to take a trip to Central Park. Central Park is located in the middle of Manhattan
and takes up quite a chunk of land. It includes a couple of ponds, hundreds of trees, large
grassy areas, rocky parts, and trails for urban “hiking.” Many species of animals call Central
Park home, too. For some of them, it may be the only place within New York City where they
can actually survive.
Central Park was constructed because city planners knew that New Yorkers would need a
getaway location, a place where they could reconnect with nature, or at least the parts of it
that are more traditionally considered “natural.” It is still certainly the case that New Yorkers
need this outlet, which explains why Central Park still exists today as the price of local real
estate has only increased over the years. Parks like this one “soften” the urban experience,
giving locals a place to relax and engage in important recreational activities. Many scientists
note that, though cities are ecosystems and a growing part of nature, the loss of greenery is a
severe problem that needs to change. The urban planners of today are becoming more
sensitive to this by making sure to include parks, taking a page out of the books of those who
helped create Central Park as they continue to build new cities and expand upon those that
have already been founded.
Doug and Eve strolled around the park for quite a while. They took tons of photos, ate lunch
together, and even rode the famous merry‐go‐round. They were truly taking advantage of the
pleasures allowed by the existence of such an incredible and unique location.
***
When Doug and Eve left Central Park, they began to chat about all of the noise in the city and
the overflowing garbage cans that were seemingly on every block. These are common
complaints made by many about the urban ecosystem, and might be more noticeable just
after leaving such a beautiful place. Though they are considered to be large negatives of urban
life, it is nearly impossible for noise pollution and garbage to be avoided.
Noise pollution is a byproduct of the large population and all of the transportation needed to
get them around. Without such transportation, humans would not be able to live, prosper,
and interact as effectively. Many people would rather not think about the existence of bugs,
rats and other organisms that can live off of garbage, but they too, are part of the ecosystem
and would not be able to survive as easily in many other parts of the world.
***
Doug and Eve took the same subway back to their home in Brooklyn. Tired from a long day of
walking around the city, they kicked off their shoes and sat on the couch in preparation for a
nice movie viewing. The film was a documentary about living in the backwoods of Montana,
enjoying life in a forest’s ecosystem. Doug and Eve thought about vacationing there, inspired
by their afternoon in Central Park, wanting to be closer to some more nature. They didn’t even
stop to think that they had both been active participants in an urban ecosystem, a particularly
unique part of nature, over the course of the entire day.
