Water makes up nearly three‐quarters of the Earth’s surface, but it does more than just cover
our planet ‐ it also plays a vital role in shaping it.  
Consider the Grand Canyon. Measuring 277 miles long, 18 miles wide and more than 1 mile deep,
it is considered one of the Seven Natural Wonders of the World and attracts more than 5 million
visitors per year. This geological marvel was created by the waters of the Colorado River through
the processes of weathering and erosion. Weathering is the process by which moving water breaks
down soil, rock and minerals, and erosion is the process by which the flowing water transports soil
and rock from one spot and deposits it elsewhere. The two processes often occur in conjunction.  
Weathering and erosion are very slow processes. Geologists believe the Colorado River has
been flowing through the Grand Canyon for at least 17 million years, and it has been gradually
shaping the canyon this entire time. The flowing water of the river and its tributaries has
carved away at the rock of the Colorado Plateau, creating the sight we are familiar with today.  
Caves and caverns are another example of weathering and erosion. Limestone caves, such as
the Carlsbad Caverns in New Mexico, are formed when rainwater mixes with carbon dioxide in
the ground and wears away at the limestone. Sea caves, which can be found along coastlines,
are formed when powerful waves crash against the shore and break away chunks of rock. Ice
caves are formed when glaciers melt, and the ice melt flows across the ground as a stream.
You don’t have to travel very far to see the effects of weathering and erosion for yourself, though.
If you’ve ever been to the beach, you’ve already seen evidence of how powerful of a force moving
water can be—and all you had to do was look down. The sand covering the beach is actually the
result of rocks being broken down into tiny pieces and then washed ashore by the waves.
Although weather and erosion are responsible for creating beautiful sights such as sandy
beaches and the Grand Canyon, there are many negative consequences as well. Landslides are
some of the most dangerous side effects of erosion. When hillsides or mountainsides are
gradually worn away, they can become unstable and break down, especially when triggered by
extreme weather such as floods, heavy rain or snow. Every year, landslides cause massive
amounts of property damage and casualties.  
Erosion is a natural process, and it is often beneficial for the planet. However, excessive erosion
can cause major problems, including desertification and the ecological collapse of entire areas.
If erosion happens at a pace faster than the land can regenerate itself, this can render the land
desert‐like and incapable of supporting life. Believe it or not, soil is actually a valuable and
nonrenewable resource, as it contains nutrients and minerals crucial for agricultural
productivity. It takes thousands and thousands of years to build up enough soil in a region for
the land to be productive, but erosion can wear it away much faster than that, especially at the
rate it has been occurring in recent decades. Over the past 40 years, the world has lost 30
percent of its agriculturally productive land as a result of erosion.  
Although erosion occurs naturally at a very slow rate, human activities have sped up the
process by an estimated 10 to 40 times globally. The biggest culprit is unsustainable
agricultural practices and the industrialization of agriculture. The mechanized equipment used
in modern agriculture allows for deep plowing of the soil. This breaks the soil into finer
particles, which is desirable for agriculture because it facilitates planting and also increases the
plants’ access to oxygen. However, deep plowing also increases the amount of soil that is
vulnerable to being washed away by erosion. Throughout much of history, plowing had to be
done manually, and it was a labor‐intensive process. With the mechanization of agriculture,
farmers are able to plow much deeper and more often than ever before, resulting in disastrous
consequences for soil quality.  
The effect of erosion on soil productivity has been felt all over the world, in Africa, Asia,
Australia, New Zealand, the United States and Southern and Eastern Europe. In more affluent
countries, the use of artificial fertilizer has become more prevalent as a way to offset the
reduction in soil quality that occurs when the nutrient‐rich layers of topsoil are washed away.
However, this in turn has created a new set of problems. Over‐application of fertilizer is
common, and much of the excess gets washed away and transported to nearby bodies of
water, where the nutrients in the fertilizer can upset the local ecosystem.
Deforestation has also played a role in the rapid increase in erosion globally. Trees and plant roots
naturally bind the soil and anchor it to prevent too much from being washed away. They also
provide cover and reduce the speed at which rain hits the ground, absorbing much of the impact.
This allows the water to trickle to the ground and absorb slowly, rather than flow over the surface
and wash away the soil. Deforestation of lands for agriculture and development has rendered large
regions of the world unproductive. The effect is amplified in areas that are used for urban
development, where the ground is covered with a layer of asphalt or concrete. These surfaces make
it difficult for water to penetrate the ground, and increase the volume of runoff to surrounding
areas. In addition, the runoff from urban areasis often polluted with fuel, oil and other chemicals.
Lastly, climate change has led to more extreme climate events, including extreme rainfall and
hurricanes. Scientists predict that increased rainfall intensity and quantity will lead to greater rates of
erosion. Rising sea levels have also increased the rate of coastal erosion, which has been increasingly
problematic for low‐lying developed areas along the coast,such asin Florida and Hawaii.
As erosion has become a bigger problem in past decades, scientists have been working to
better understand the phenomenon. In 1965, American scientists came up with the Universal
Soil Loss Equation, a way to estimate soil erosion by raindrop impact and surface runoff. The
mathematical equation has since been applied all over the world, helping scientists predict
which conservation measures will have the greatest impact on reducing soil loss.
Scientists have found that the most effective way to reduce soil loss from erosion is to increase
the amount of vegetative cover (from grass, plants and trees, for example) on the ground. In
recent years, there has also been a gradual shift toward more ecologically conscious
agricultural practices. Societies around the world have begun to feel the devastating effects of
decades of unsustainable agricultural practices and deforestation, and many have started
taking preventative measures. As the consequences of modern industrial agriculture have
become apparent, farmers have been encouraged to take steps to reduce erosion. It is now
considered good practice to minimize plowing of the land to preserve the integrity of the soil.
Crop rotation is a good alternative: planting different kinds of crops can improve soil structure
and keep the soil enriched with necessary nutrients and minerals, and with better soil,
frequent plowing becomes less necessary.
However, despite all measures to prevent soil loss, it’s important to remember that humans
will never have complete control over the processes of weathering and erosion. Water will
continue to shape the world we live in, sometimes for better and sometimes for worse, and it’s
up to us to simply make the best of it.
