A Streetcar Named Desire is a classic of the American theater. Tennessee Williams’ landmark
work was a tour de force in its original stage production in 1947 and continues to resonate with audiences
and readers today despite—or perhaps because of—its simplistic though layered story. A faded Southern
belle, Blanche DuBois, arrives at her sister’s seedy New Orleans apartment where she is tortured by her
brutish brother-in-law, Stanley Kowalski. Blanche puts on airs of class and happiness throughout the play,
though internally she is miserable and haunted by her tragic and scandalous past. Stanley forces Blanche
to face her dolorous reality with his vitriol and, finally, his act of sexual aggression, and in doing so, he
causes her to lose her tenuous grip on sanity. Most have argued (correctly) that the play is about the
ways the past haunts our present or (again correctly) that it is about the ways class and sexuality impact
our lives. However, few have seen the play for what it is: an allegory for the theater itself.
Before Williams wrote Streetcar, the theater had been dominated by melodrama. A brief interlude
in the 1930s brought political theater to center stage (pardon the pun), but by the 1940s, its principal
playwright, Clifford Odets, had left New York for Hollywood, and the sensationalized and maudlin form of
melodrama once again flourished. The theater was in limbo, and Williams had a desire to bring something
new to the world. It would bring the realism of the political theater of the 1930s but without the political
(read: socialist) underpinnings. To that end, he created lifelike characters who spoke in realistic dialect.
But to make his point that melodrama was flawed, he added an equally unrealistic character.
Blanche, unlike the other characters, speaks theatrically, acts larger than life on stage, and uses floral
language and heightened mannerisms. Blanche is a character not to be trusted. She lies about
everything, and the only thing that finally exposes her lies is reality itself: Stanley. He finally forces her off
the stage and into the insane asylum by forcing himself on her sexually. And with that, realism forcibly
removed melodrama from the stage.
