Concussions are brain injuries that occur when a person receives a blow to the head, face, or
neck. Although most people who suffer a concussion experience initial bouts of dizziness, nausea, and
drowsiness, these symptoms often disappear after a few days. The long-term effects of concussions,
however, are less understood and far more severe. Recent studies suggest that people who suffer
multiple concussions are at significant risk for developing chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), a
degenerative brain disorder that causes a variety of dangerous mental and emotional problems to arise
weeks, months, or even years after the initial injury. These psychological problems can include
depression, anxiety, memory loss, inability to concentrate, and aggression. In extreme cases, people
suffering from CTE have even committed suicide or homicide. The majority of people who develop these
issues are athletes who participate in popular high-impact sports, especially football. Although new sports
regulations and improvements in helmet technology can help protect players, amateur leagues, the sports
media, and fans all bear some of the responsibility for reducing the incidence of these devastating
injuries.
Improvements in diagnostic technology have provided substantial evidence to link severe—and
often fatal—psychological disorders to the head injuries that players receive while on the field. Recent
autopsies performed on the brains of football players who have committed suicide have shown advanced
cases of CTE in every single victim.
In response to the growing understanding of this danger, the National Football League (NFL) has revised
its safety regulations. Players who have suffered a head injury on the field must undergo a “concussion
sideline assessment”—a series of mental and physical fitness tests—before being allowed back in the
game. In an effort to diminish the amount of head and neck injuries on the field, NFL officials began
enforcing stricter penalty calls for helmet-to-helmet contact, leading with the head, and hitting a
defenseless player. Furthermore, as of 2010, if a player’s helmet is accidentally wrenched from his head
during play, the ball is immediately whistled dead. It is hoped that these new regulations, coupled with
advances in helmet design, will reduce the number of concussions, and thus curb further cases of CTE.
Efforts by the NFL and other professional sports leagues are certainly laudable; we should
commend every attempt to protect the mental and physical health of players. However, new regulations at
the professional level cannot protect amateur players, especially young people. Fatal cases of CTE have
been reported in victims as young as 21. Proper tackling form—using the arms and shoulders to aim for a
player’s midsection—should be taught at an early age. Youth, high school, and college leagues should
also adopt safety rules even more stringent than those of the NFL. Furthermore, young athletes should be
educated about the serious dangers of head injuries at an early age.
Perhaps the most important factor in reducing the number of traumatic brain injuries, however,
lies not with the players, the coaches, or the administrators, but with the media and fans. Sports media
producers have become accustomed to showcasing the most aggressive tackles and the most intense
plays. NFL broadcasts often replay especially violent collisions while the commentators marvel at the
players’ physical prowess. Some sports highlights television programs even feature weekly countdowns
of the “hardest hits.” When the media exalts such dangerous behavior, professionals are rewarded for
injuring each other on the field and amateurs become more likely to try to imitate their favorite NFL
athletes. Announcers, commentators, television producers, and sportswriters should engage in a
collective effort to cease glorifying brutal plays. In turn, fans should stop expecting their favorite players to
put their lives on the line for the purposes of entertainment. Players must not be encouraged to trade their
careers, their health, their happiness, and even their lives for the sake of a game. 
