The biggest house of cards, the longest tongue, and of course, the tallest man: these are among
the thousands of records logged in the famous Guinness Book of Records. Created in 1955 after a
debate concerning Europe's fastest game bird, what began as a marketing tool sold to pub landlords to
promote Guinness, an Irish drink, became the bestselling copyright title of all time (a category that
excludes books such as the Bible and the Koran). In time, the book would sell 120 million copies in over
100 countries— quite a leap from its humble beginnings.
In its early years, the book set its sights on satisfying man's innate curiosity about the natural
world around him. Its two principal fact finders, twins Norris and Ross McWhirter, scoured the globe to
collect empirical facts. It was their task to find and document aspects of life that can be sensed or
observed, things that can be quantified or measured. But not just any things. They were only interested in
superlatives: the biggest and the best. It was during this period that some of the hallmark Guinness
Records were documented, answering such questions as "What is the brightest star?" and "What is the
biggest spider?"
Once aware of the public's thirst for such knowledge, the book's authors began to branch out to
cover increasingly obscure, little-known facts. They started documenting human achievements as well. A
forerunner for reality television, the Guinness Book gave people a chance to become famous for
accomplishing eccentric, often pointless tasks. Records were set in 1955 for consuming 24 raw eggs in
14 minutes and in 1981 for the fastest solving of a Rubik's Cube (which took a mere 38 seconds). In 1979
a man yodeled non-stop for ten and a quarter hours.
In its latest incarnation, the book has found a new home on the internet. No longer restricted to
the confines of physical paper, the Guinness World Records website contains seemingly innumerable
facts concerning such topics as the most powerful combustion engine, or the world's longest train. What
is striking, however, is that such facts are found sharing a page with the record of the heaviest train to be
pulled with a beard. While there is no denying that each of these facts has its own, individual allure, the
latter represents a significant deviation from the education-oriented facts of earlier editions. Perhaps there
is useful knowledge to be gleaned regarding the tensile strength of a beard, but this seems to cater to an
audience more interested in seeking entertainment than education.
Originating as a simple bar book, the Guinness Book of Records has evolved over decades to
provide insight into the full spectrum of modern life. And although one may be more likely now to learn
about the widest human mouth than the highest number of casualties in a single battle of the Civil War,
the Guinness World Records website offers a telling glimpse into the future of fact-finding and recordrecording.
