Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a range of psychological conditions characterized by
abnormalities in social interaction, behavior, interests, and communication. The five forms of ASD include
classical autism, Asperger syndrome, Pervasive Developmental Disorder, Rett syndrome, and Childhood
Disintegrative Disorder. Although the number of reported cases of ASD has experienced a dramatic increase in
the past 25 years, the majority of doctors agree that this increase is due to changes in diagnostic practices and
advances in the understanding of psychiatric health. While there is no general consensus among medical
professionals about the underlying causes of ASD, theories range from genetic inheritance to environmental
factors. One of the most controversial theories to have emerged in recent times is the hypothesis that ASD
could be caused by the MMR vaccine, which is an immunization against measles, mumps, and rubella that was
first developed in the 1960’s. The vaccine is a mixture of three live viruses and is administered via injection to
children when they are one year old. By the late 1990’s, this vaccination had led to the near-eradication of
measles in countries that employed widespread inoculation. However, a combination of spurious scientific data
and alarmist media attention led to an entirely preventable resurgence in measles cases in the early 21st
century.
The first claims of a connection between the MMR vaccine and autism were made in 1998, when an
article in The Lancet, a respected British medical journal, reported on eight cases of autism that could possibly
be traced back to the administration of an MMR vaccine. The parents of the children in this study contended
that the symptoms of autism in their children developed within days of vaccination. During a press conference,
Andrew Wakefield, one of the authors of the article, called on British doctors to stop giving combined MMR
vaccines, instead advocating for individual inoculations against measles, mumps, and rubella.
Following the publication of this article, Wakefield published several follow-up papers that further
questioned the safety of the MMR vaccine. An onslaught of media coverage then began. Parents appeared on
television sharing anecdotal evidence linking their child’s inoculation to the onset of ASD. The popular press
quickly seized upon this story; in 2002, over 1200 articles were written about the link between MMR vaccines
and ASD. Less than 30% of these articles mentioned that an overwhelming amount of scientific evidence
suggested that these vaccinations were completely safe.
Since the initial panic, fears that MMR vaccines cause ASD have generally subsided. A survey
completed in 2004 showed that only 2% of people in the United Kingdom thought that there was a legitimate
link between MMR vaccines and ASD. Fears were most likely allayed when, in 2004, an investigative reporter
discovered that Andrew Wakefield had received a large sum of money from lawyers seeking evidence to use in
cases against vaccine manufacturers. It was then discovered that Wakefield had applied for patents on an
alternate MMR vaccine. These severe conflicts of interest damaged the credibility of Wakefield’s study beyond
repair. In 2010, Wakefield was tried by Britain’s General Medical Council under allegations that he had falsified
data and manipulated test results. The Council found that Wakefield had acted “dishonestly and irresponsibly,”
and consequently The Lancet officially retracted Wakefield’s 1998 article.
The anti-MMR vaccine panic that arose immediately after Wakefield’s article was published had a
significant negative effect on the health of thousands of children. Once the controversy began, the number of
parents in the United Kingdom who inoculated their children with the MMR vaccine experienced a sharp
decline. Not surprisingly, the number of reported cases of measles increased; while there were only 56
confirmed cases of measles in the UK in 1998; in 2008 there were over 1300. Between 2002 and 2008, there
were outbreaks of measles throughout Europe and North America. These outbreaks cost millions of dollars in
health care and resulted in the deaths of dozens of children and adults with compromised immune systems.
Who is to blame for these deaths? It is easy to hold Andrew Wakefield accountable, but the media
must also bear some of the responsibility. The media’s appetite for a sensational medical story overshadowed
the fact that there was very little scientific evidence behind Wakefield’s claim. Although Wakefield is certainly
not the first person to publish fraudulent scientific findings in a respected medical journal, the magnitude of this
event was anomalous, as most medical hoaxes are discredited before they can reach the popular media. While
The Lancet should not have published Wakefield’s article without checking it thoroughly, the popular media
should not have blown the study out of proportion without fully considering the consequences. 
