It is not uncommon for close synonyms to be understood to share the same meaning. The
difference between words like "hard" and "difficult", for example, goes tragically unnoticed. One may
employ one or the other with complete indifference, postulating no discrepancy between them. In general
this is well and good; most people lack the scrupulous pedanticalness to quibble over such trifles.
Nevertheless, for those of us with ample compulsiveness (and time), it is of significant value to
comprehend such nuances.
Take for example the following sentences: 1) The test was hard. 2) The test was difficult. Is the
difference between these synonyms readily apparent? Is there a noticeable difference between them at
all? Indeed, these questions are valid and warrant answer. For, what would be the point to having multiple
words with the exact same meaning? No, that would be superfluous; the English language being far too
economical. While many close synonyms share similar, if not the same, dictionary definitions, the feeling,
or mood, they convey is utterly singular. Although a dictionary can provide information about word
meanings, pronunciations, etymologies, inflected forms, derived forms, et cetera, it cannot communicate
how it feels to use a word.
So, if there is indeed a difference between words like "hard" and "difficult", what is it? To begin,
"hard" is pragmatic and realistic, firmly grounded in reality. It is a utilitarian word that gets the job done
and doesn't apologize for its brusque, uncouth nature. On the other hand, "difficult" is eloquent and
refined. It is civilized, willing to expend the effort necessary to appear urbane. Why, the mere difference in
sonic quality between them is striking enough. "Hard" makes a quick, unassuming sound, having but a
single syllable (voiced under certain inflections, it can even come across as harsh), while "difficult" is
more lengthy and melodic, its number of syllables totaling three times that of its counterpart. Furthermore,
"hard" is more likely to be used in casual, informal circumstances, or to communicate an idea "on the go"
or simply to "get it out" as the sayings go. It is used without pretense, and does not maintain a feeling of
being overly concerned. In terms of daily usage, "hard" may be employed by an exhausted brick mason
when posed with the question, "How was your day?" Conversely, "difficult" may be used by a military
general upon explaining to his or her superior the progression of a particularly taxing campaign.
Similar to "hard" and "difficult", the words "weird" and "strange" too are close synonyms, and may
seemingly be used interchangeably. Take for instance the following sentences: 1) Sea monkeys are
weird. 2) Sea monkeys are strange. Contrary to popular belief, these sentences are not tautologous. So
how do they differ? Their dictionary definitions are nearly identical, so the difference does not lie there.
Rather, the difference involves the feeling, or mood, that these words convey. Notice that while "weird"
and "strange" both have but one syllable, the latter has a remarkably distinguished feel. Similar to "hard",
"weird" conveys a more basic, a more crude, sentiment. Something "weird" is crass or gross, and is
typically undesirable. No one wants to be associated with something "weird". If trying to impress
someone, one probably doesn't want to be categorized among the "weird". On the other hand, if
something is labeled as "strange", it is not necessarily bad. Rather, something "strange" is simply
abnormal, or unusual—a deviation from what is expected. This distinction between "weird" and "strange"
is so pronounced that the latter can be used as a euphemism for the former in certain situations. For
example, notice how a simple substitution is able to make the following sentence less offensive: "Your
mother's cookies taste weird" compared to ” Your mother's cookies taste strange". In the former sentence,
the speaker sounds as though he or she is insulting your mother's cookies, stating
that they taste bad. In the latter sentence, however, the speaker sounds as though the cookies simply
taste different, or unusual, compared to what he or she is used to—the difference owing to the innocuous
addition of too much flour, perhaps.
Finally, let's look at the synonyms, "happy" and "glad". As in the aforementioned cases, these
words seem to have little or no discernible difference between them. Take for example the following
sentences: 1) Tommy is happy because he got a new bike. 2) Tommy is glad because he got a new bike.
Most understand these sentences to have the same meaning. And again, upon consulting a dictionary,
one will find highly similar, if not the same, definitions. But these definitions lack the feeling, the unique
emotional charge that these words convey. The word "happy" conveys a sense of levity, or a carefree
attitude. The thought of someone who is "happy" conjures the image of a bright-eyed, ruddy, smiling face.
One is "happy" on the morning of his birthday, discovering a new puppy bounding into his bedroom. On
the other hand, the word "glad" conveys a sense of relief or contentment. The thought of someone who is
"glad" conjures the image of a man standing crossed-armed, nodding gently, a stoic grin crossing his
face. One is "glad" when he sees that the child's lost puppy has been found, and was merely frolicking too
far from home.
Granted, the notion that close synonyms can be used interchangeably is prevalent among
English speakers. And alas, the dictionary—the text purported to be responsible for clarifying such
issues—is of little assistance. In the end, it is left to us, the speakers of the language, those actively
responsible for maintaining its sustenance and generation, to understand how these words make us feel
and what mood we are inclined to attach to them. Using the examples and insights described above, one
may come to recognize these subtle, yet crucial, differences. 
