Like many people acting on the desire to eat healthy and local, Acropolis resident Eduardo
Jimenez decided to plant a garden in his backyard. He tilled the soil, he planted the seeds, and he even
erected a fence to keep out the deer. Eduardo did everything right. Or so it seems. Harvest time has
come, and he has not one tomato, bean, or leaf of lettuce to show for his hard work. How did this
happen? The answer comes in the form of a small, brown, particularly smelly insect: the stink bug.
Unlike their fastidious cousins, stink bugs feed on some 300 species of plants, including figs,
mulberries, corn, and citrus fruits as well as soybeans, legumes, and weeds. Although they do little
damage to the plant itself, they make the fruits and vegetables unmarketable. For this reason, stink bugs
pose the most serious threat to the big agriculturalists and macro farm operators. Macro farmers have
more invested in their produce, and therefore have more to lose. While hobbyists like Eduardo are left to
face the disappointment of an unsuccessful garden, macro farmers are forced to live with the loss of
entire tracts of cash crops—a fact that has left many barely able to clothe their children or put food on the
table. Last season alone, several New Jersey pepper farmers saw 75% of their crops damaged.
Pennsylvania lost half of its peach population, and, according to the US Apple Association, apple farmers
in the mid-Atlantic states lost $37 million. This year could be worse.
As a result of this decline in the supply of fresh fruits and vegetables, shoppers have seen
adjustments—sometimes quite dramatic—in prices at the grocery store. Prices of apples in Maryland are
up 8%. In the north-Atlantic states, prices for peppers shot up an astounding 14%. Not only are these
items becoming more expensive, but they are also getting harder to find. Last week, Marge Jenkins of
Athens, Georgia reported having to check three different stores before stumbling upon a decent batch of
peas. And this, she assures us, is a regular occurrence.
Accidentally brought from Asia, the stink bug has no natural predators in America, and thus its
population is soaring. Reported sightings of stink bugs are becoming increasingly numerous, as the
desiccated, brown, trapezoidal shells of the dead bugs are ubiquitous in some areas. This has farmers
and scientists alike scratching their heads in search of a remedy. Hope, they believe, may lie with an
Asian parasitic wasp, which helpfully lays its eggs inside stink bug eggs. The larvae of the wasp devour
the stink bug from the inside. Implementation of such a solution is still several years away, as scientists
must first determine if it is safe for the wasp to be introduced into America. Until then, some farmers are
resorting to homemade traps. Others have even contemplated the use of peacocks and praying mantises,
which, they hypothesize, will gulp down the little stinkers.
