The average computer user has between 5 and 15 username/password combinations to log in to
email accounts, social networking sites, discussion boards, news and entertainment sites, online stores,
online banking accounts, or other websites. For people who use email or other internet applications at
work, the number of required username/password combinations may surpass 30. Some of these
accounts demand that you use a specific number of symbols and digits, while others require you to
change your password every 60 days. When you add to this list the codes needed to access things like
ATMs, home alarm systems, padlocks, or voicemail, the number of passwords becomes staggering. The
feeling of frustration that results from maintaining a memorized list of login credentials has grown so
prevalent that it actually has a name: password fatigue.
Having to remember so many different passwords is irritating, but it can also be dangerous.
Because it is virtually impossible to remember a unique password for each of these accounts, many
people leave handwritten lists of usernames and passwords on or next to their computers. Others solve
this problem by using the same password for every account or using extremely simple passwords. While
these practices make it easier to remember login information, they also make it exponentially easier for
thieves to hack into accounts.
Single sign-on (SSO) authentication and password management software can help mitigate this
problem, but there are drawbacks to both approaches. SSO authentication can be used for related, but
independent software systems. With SSO, users log in once to access a variety of different applications.
Users only need to remember one password to log in to the main system; the SSO software then
automatically logs the user in to other accounts within the system. SSO software is typically used by large
companies, schools, or libraries. Password management software, such as KeePass and Password Safe,
is most often used on personal computers. These software programs—which have been built into many
major web browsers—store passwords in a remote database and automatically “remember” users’
passwords for a variety of sites.
The problem with both SSO authentication and password management software is that the
feature that makes them useful is also what makes them vulnerable. If a user loses or forgets the
password required to log in to SSO software, the user will then lose access to all of the applications linked
to the SSO account. Furthermore, if a hacker can crack the SSO password, he or she will then have
access to all of the linked accounts. Users who rely on password management software are susceptible
to the same problems, but they also incur the added threat of passwords being compromised because of
computer theft.
Although most websites or network systems allow users to recover or change lost passwords by
providing email addresses or answering a prompt, this process can waste time and cause further
frustration. What is more, recovering a forgotten password is only a temporary solution; it does not
address the larger problem of password fatigue.
Some computer scientists have suggested that instead of passwords, computers rely on
biometrics. This is a method of recognizing human users based on unique traits, such as fingerprints,
voice, or DNA. Biometric identification is currently used by some government agencies and private
companies, including the Department of Defense and Disney World. While biometrics would certainly
eliminate the need for people to remember passwords, the use of biometrics raises ethical questions
concerning privacy and can also be expensive to implement.
The problems associated with SSO, password management software, and biometrics continue to
stimulate software engineers and computer security experts to search for the cure to password fatigue.
Until they find the perfect solution, however, everyone will simply have to rely on the flawed password
system currently in place.
