According to some estimates, if we could compile the amount of food, land, water, and energy
used to raise the 10 billion animals slaughtered each year for meat, we could use those resources to feed
every single starving person on earth. The majority of these resources are depleted by concentrated
animal feeding operations (CAFOs). CAFOs are factory farms that mass-produce livestock—harming
animals, the environment, and humans in the process. It is true that these farming methods provide an
abundant source of food and employ thousands of workers across the country. However, CAFOs should
be placed under more stringent restrictions because of their unfair treatment of animals and the harm
they do to both the environment and humans.
One of the key controversies surrounding factory farms is animal rights. Factory farms raise
livestock indoors, as opposed to allowing the animals to graze in fields and pastures. The farmers favor
this overcrowded environment because it maximizes profits. Providing less space for the animals costs
less money; filling pens to their maximum capacity ensures that no space is wasted. Consequently,
animal pens are often so small that larger animals cannot lie down or turn around. In some cases, these
small cages are beneficial for more than just maximizing capacity: calves, for example, do not gain
muscle mass in this environment. This keeps their meat more tender, which makes it more attractive to
consumers.
Livestock in CAFOs are often found living in their own urine and feces, stimulating the spread of
diseases—such as avian flu, foot and mouth disease, and mad cow disease—among other animals on
the farm. In order to combat this, farmers must give the animals antibiotics. In many cases, however,
antibiotics are used for disease prevention instead of treatment. In addition to being used to combat the
spread of disease, antibiotics are also commonly used to encourage faster growth in livestock. This
overuse increases the risk of livestock developing immunity to antibiotics, ironically making animals even
more susceptible to disease. After being digested, these antibiotics are released back into the
environment in the form of milk, meat, and waste, which can affect the people who eat these products or
the environment that absorbs them.
CAFOs also negatively impact the environment in the form of air and water pollution. Factory
farms contribute to air pollution issues in the United States through the release of toxic gases and vapors
and by burning fossil fuels to run farm machinery. These farms also have notable consequences for the
environment in terms of water pollution. One characteristic of CAFOs that creates water pollution is the
presence of a lagoon. Lagoons are artificial storage basins where animal excrement is temporarily
contained; periodically, farmers flush this waste into ditches or nearby bodies of water. This waste
combines with runoff from fertilized fields to pollute the water sources surrounding CAFOs. It adds excess
nutrients, pathogens, veterinary pharmaceuticals, heavy metals, and excreted hormones to the water
sources. Such pollutants not only affect aquatic life, but can lead to severe impacts on human health.
Another negative environmental impact of factory farms is resource depletion. Factory farming
uses more land than any other agricultural or industrial enterprise in the country. CAFOs consume a great
deal of resources in terms of grain, energy, and land. There are far more efficient ways of using these
resources to feed people. For example, it has been estimated that the grain used to feed livestock in the
United States alone could feed up to 800 million people in one year. By contrast, the production of
livestock in CAFOs is a wasteful use of energy. While both chicken meat and soybeans are good sources
of protein, producing equivalent amounts of protein from chicken meat and soybeans does not require
equivalent amounts of energy: chicken meat production consumes 14 times more energy than soybean
production. Grain and energy supplies should be used more efficiently to produce food sources other than
livestock.
In order to combat the unfair treatment of animals and the risks to environmental and human
health, CAFOs should be placed under stricter guidelines. One such regulation would force factory farms
to adhere to air and water quality protection standards from which they have previously been exempted, like those set forth by the Clean Water Act. Enforcing these standards would lead to banning
environmental hazards such as waste lagoons, which in turn would reduce environmental pollution and
human health liabilities.
Some have suggested that due to these environmental and human health concerns, factory farms
should be banned outright. Advocates for CAFOs, however, argue that factory farming allows for lower
production costs that translate into lower food prices for consumers. Organic and free-range products,
they argue, do not allow for the large-scale production of livestock; prices for meat, eggs, and dairy would
increase should the country shift towards organic products. Although this would be an inconvenience to
consumers, a price increase would encourage people to eat a diet of less meat. This cultural change
would assist in solving the broader resource crisis as fewer grain, energy, and land resources would be
needed to support smaller-scale production. Better treatment of animals and more responsible
environmental practices would protect humans more from infectious diseases and the effects of air and
water pollution—a benefit everyone should embrace.
