When most people think of the martial arts, they likely conjure up images commonly featured in movies, such as people kicking at each other while yelling "Hi-ya!" People also often assume that the martial arts are synonymous with karate. But these assumptions do not represent the full variety of the martial arts. One of the least understood martial arts is ninjutsu, which, as practiced today, is less a form of fighting and more a way for practitioners to positively affect their own lives.
Ninjutsu is perhaps the purest form of martial arts. Originating in Japan, it was first practiced—according to legend—by a group of assassins and spies skilled in the art of espionage. These devious, secretive agents of the night are what people in modern times often refer to as <em>ninjas</em>, known for their sly tricks. However, the modern form of ninjutsu is a rather different animal than that which is described in the tales of ancient Japan.
Modern ninjutsu is an art that focuses on teaching different methods of self-defense to a wide range of people. It is appropriate for people of varying levels of age, experience, fitness, and strength. In this respect ninjutsu differs significantly from karate. While ninjutsu is concerned primarily with providing the student the most effective means of defense for real-world scenarios, karate is an art that focuses not only on self-defense, but also on active competition. Because it is competition-based, karate requires a certain level of physical strength and fitness in order for practitioners to compete effectively. Practitioners of karate train for sport, whereas students of ninjutsu learn skills that they can apply in real-world situations in order to keep themselves and others safe from harm. One need not be a skilled athlete or in astounding physical shape to become a practitioner of ninjutsu. It is intended to be accessible to everyone, regardless of physical stature or natural athleticism.
Ninjutsu can have a remarkable impact on the lives of those who practice it. Self-defense training can give an individual a huge boost in confidence, transforming someone who was once tentative and shy into a person who feels confident and secure. If people can move past stereotypes to unearth the truth about the martial arts, they will find that the martial arts provide a wealth of opportunities for self-improvement.
