A weary traveler makes his way across a seemingly endless plane of sand. The sun blazes above his head. There is nothing behind him but a long stretch of footprints. There is nothing ahead but more sand. The traveler wipes his brow and looks off into the distance. He is hot. He is tired. He is thirsty. All hope seems lost.
But wait! He sees something up ahead. There on the horizon—it looks like a pool of cool, refreshing water. If he can just make it there, he will be saved! He pushes on, determined to make it to the water. Hours pass and he is no closer. Suddenly, a wave of dejection washes over him—there was never any water at all. It was a mirage.
What made our traveler think that there was water in the middle of the desert? Was he simply so desperate for water that he imagined the entire thing? Was his overheated, exhausted mind playing tricks on him?
What the traveler saw was not caused by exhaustion or an overactive imagination. Mirages are very real. In fact, you have probably seen one yourself, even if you have never been to the desert.
A mirage is a scientific event caused by the bending of light, also called light refraction. Mirages occur when the density of the atmosphere changes rapidly because of a significant temperature difference. As anyone who has walked on a beach barefoot knows, sand can get very hot—as much as 50° F (10°C ) hotter than the air above it. Because cold air is denser than warm air, the air right above the hot sand is much less dense than the cold air a few feet higher. As the light passes from the colder air to the hotter air, it bends towards the sky. When this bent light reaches your eye, your brain interprets it in a strange way: you see the sky reflected in the sand. This image of the sky reflected in the sand looks just like a body of water. Therefore, an exhausted desert traveler who sees the blue sky reflected on the ground thinks that there is a refreshing lake just ahead of him on the horizon.
You do not need to be walking across miles of hot sand in order to see a mirage. Asphalt and tarmac—the materials most roads are made of—can also get much hotter than the air above them. Because the air right above the hot road is denser than the air a few feet higher, light bends the same way it does in the desert. So when you are driving on a very hot day, you may see a large puddle in the street just ahead of you. Unless it has been raining very recently, that water is not actually there at all—it is just a mirage.
