You can save a lot of money if you read the store sale flyer before you make your shopping list. I know this because I have been a clerk at Berry’s Supermarket for 4 years. I clean the store, stock the shelves, and help the customers find what they are looking for. I have seen a lot of foolish shoppers pay full price for things they don’t need. On the other hand, I have seen a lot of smart shoppers too.
The smart shoppers always look at the sales flyers before they begin shopping. The flyers come with the newspaper, but we also place some right by the front doors. Shoppers can pick them up when they walk in the store. The flyers list all of the items that are on sale that week. The flyers show what the prices are. Sometimes the prices are half off!
  This is good news for the shoppers, but sometimes it is not good news for me. When a sale is really big, many people come to Berry’s. The store becomes very crowded. Sometimes, customers buy all of an item that is on sale. Then other customers get mad because they have come to the store just to buy that item and cannot find it. Those customers should not get mad at Berry’s, though. The store can only hold so many products! Plus, if an item is sold out and a customer still has an interest in buying it, Berry’s will give the customer a "rain check." This will allow them to buy the item at the sale price as soon as it gets restocked, even after the sale is finished.
Berry’s has to give out the most rain checks when the store has its "Back to School Spectacular." In addition to the specials that run for the week, there are new specials every weekday. On Monday, folders are on sale for $1. On Tuesday, notebooks are on sale for $2. On Wednesday, backpacks are on sale for $5. On Thursday, lunchboxes are half price. On Friday, crayons and markers are half off.
I am sure that Berry’s will be more crowded than ever for the sale. I will have to stock a lot of shelves, and I'm sure I'll have to write a lot of rain checks. I'll be happy when the weekend starts!
