Jeffrey brushed quickly past an elderly woman waiting on the platform ahead of
him to get onto the subway. He wanted to be sure to get a seat to read his New
Economics Journal. As the train screeched out of the station, he lifted his head
from the business news and stared at the man directly across from him.
A fierce wave – a tsunami – of antipathy came over him. Jeffrey knew this man,
knew him all too well. They had become bitter enemies.
Their eyes locked.
As the train reached full speed, the cacophony of speeding wheels against the
winding rails and of the wildly vibrating subway car filled Jeffrey’s ears. To this
frenetic beat, Jeffrey listed in his head all the reasons that this man, whose eyes
he gravely stared into, whose image seemed to appear nearly everywhere he
went, had become anathema to him.
He had climbed the upper echelons of the Wall Street firm using an imperious
manner with his subordinates: issuing directives; ordaining idiosyncratic decrees;
generally making certain everyone knew he was the boss.
Despite his impoverished upbringing, he had become ostentatious. Flush with
cash from the lucrative deals he made on Wall Street, he had purchased a yacht
and a home in Versailles. He used neither. But, oh, how he liked to say he had
them. Meanwhile—Jeffrey knew—this man’s father was on the verge of being
evicted from his decrepit tenement apartment in the South Bronx.
What bothered Jeffrey most about this man was that he never even attempted to
make amends for his evil ways.
Could this man change? Jeffrey did not know. But maybe, just maybe, he could
try.
The train screeched to Jeffrey’s stop at Battery Park. He gave the man one last
hard look. “See you around,” he mumbled to himself. And he knew he would—
the wrinkled brow, that part of graying hair, those cold metallic eyes in a subway
window reflection—were his own.
It would take years of hard work and self-contemplation, but Jeffrey would once
again encounter this man on the train, and marvel at what a kinder person he
had become.
