The relationship between my mother, sister and me had been cold
and inimical for as long as I could remember.
To me, my mother was irrational, hurling hurtful invectives for the slightest
infraction. “Don’t matter,” my mother grumbled when I asked her where she
moved my watercolor paints. “It ain’t like you got talent.” The time our mailbox got
knocked off she somehow got it in her head that I was the culprit. “Never
respected nothin’,” I heard her say. And my sister took my mother’s side against
me every time. Five years my senior, Tammy seemed not to have a brain in her
head. She dithered about everything, incapable of making any firm decision. No
matter how often my mother deprecated her— “dumb, ugly, fat”—Tammy made
futile attempts to fawn her way back into mother’s good graces.
My father would pontificate, “You three are more alike than you know.”
In April of 2000, my mother kicked us both out of the house. (Dad had been
exiled many years before.) After that, my sister and I went our separate ways. It
was then that I began having recurring dreams.
In one, I am running to catch up with a woman. Each time I get near, I trip and
fall. Another woman, smiling and shouting my name, comes with great
alacrity and offers her hand, but when I reach to grab it, she disappears.
In another, a female professor hands me a test. Although I have spent hours
studying for it, I know none of the answers. The professor derides me for my
poor performance. I watch while she relays my ignorance to the class with comic
hilarity.
These dreams were not hard to understand. In fact, it was just the opposite; they
were pellucid, and absent any knowledge of dream interpretation, I was still able
to devise their significance. I knew that they both reflected the pugnacious
relationship I shared with my mother and sister.
However, there was one dream I could never quite construe. I bite into an apple.
All my teeth fall out. I had this dream far more than any of the others.
Years later, in an effort to heal our fractious relationship, Mom, Tammy and I
elected to go to counseling together. After several sessions, I told my dream
about teeth tumbling out of my head.
“My God, Crystal,” said my mother. “I’ve had the exact same dream many times.”
“Me, too,” said Tammy solemnly.Breakthrough? No idea. But I was reminded of the words of my now-dead father.
Maybe the three of us are more alike than we know.
