Lida sat outside her great aunt’s hotel
watching the steam engines go by and
listening to the clop-clop of horses as they
pulled wagons down the cobbled road.
She was taking a short break from her
chores at the inn: mopping the ballroom,
fixing cornbread for the guests, and tending
the fire in the wood-burning stove. She enjoyed
working there and was happy to help her illustrious
aunt bolster her growing business and notoriety around the city.
Lida had always had an assiduous nature and applied herself to almost any task
unremittingly. Today, however, she took this quick respite to daydream about the
dance she would be attending that evening.
At 17, it would be her first. Her friends had all purchased brightly colored, ornate
dresses to wear. Lida, as a reflection of her demure personality, had chosen a
modest, yet elegant dress in a charcoal gray.
“Are you ready, Miss Lida?” Hattie asked as she burst through the parlor doors
and into the kitchen. Mary and Florence were in step right behind her.
“Hattie, I done told you never to come in that way. You disturb the guests having
cocktails in the parlor!”
“Oh, hush, Lida. You worry too much. Let’s go.”
“I need to put a few more logs in the stove so Auntie can boil water for the
dishes,” Lida said. “Then we can go.”
Hattie gave a sigh, but did not bother to argue. She knew that when Lida had
something to do, she didn’t rest until it was done.
“Let’s take the tracks,” Hattie said when they finally headed out to the party.
Daylight was turning into dusk.
“Naw, Hattie,” Lida said. "You know that’s too dangerous in the night.”
“Look, Lida,” Hattie said impatiently. “We’re runnin’ late ‘cause of you. The tracks
will take 15 minutes off our walk.” Mary and Florence both mumbled in
agreement. “We can take the carriage back.”
Against her better judgment, Lida agreed to take the train tracks. After all, it was
her first real dance ever. Why adulterate it with acrimony?The girls clumsily navigated the moonlit tracks and talked excitedly about the
dance: who would be there, who was the best-looking, who was the smartest,
and if anyone had remembered money for a carriage ride home. Then Lida heard
a whistle in the distance. It seemed to get louder as it persisted and then cut out
in a shock of tender silence. “We’ve gotta get off the tracks. Train’s coming,” said
Lida.
The girls scurried to the side but found the decline too precipitous. They made
their way forward along the tracks and finally found a suitable place to descend.
Lida tiptoed nimbly from the precipice. Finding herself safely below, she heard a
sudden thud. She gasped and turned about.
“Help!” she heard a voice cry, “Help…down here!” Hattie had fallen in the ash pit,
an 8 foot trench between the rails, about 20 feet long, where trains stopped to
empty ashes from the engine’s fire box when they pulled through town.
Hattie screamed and tried frantically to climb out, but the pit was too deep. Lida
scrambled to the edge, grabbing for her hand, the train getting closer, the whistle
growing evermore piercing.
Not wanting to appear scared herself, Lida’s calm voice belied the panic-stricken
beating of her heart.
“Just give me your hand, Hattie, and I’ll pull ya right out.”
They fumbled for each other’s hands in the dark. Lida lay down on the rails and
hooked her feet under the track to give herself more leverage. She had Hattie in
her fingertips. Then she lost her. Then she had her again. Lida pulled and she
could feel the joints in Hattie’s hands popping. In this instant, Hattie found better
purchase—on what, no one could be sure—and her hands came into view.
Wearing a mask of anguish, her teeth clenched and reflecting the pale moonlight,
Lida pulled and pulled. Hattie’s amorphous form appeared from below the
surface like some stygian phantom. Mary and Florence’s screams could be heard
intermittently in the night, watching helplessly as the train lights grew brighter.
Hattie’s torso finally eclipsed the edge of the pit and there she lay, catching her
breath. The girls hoisted her to her feet and hobbled away from the tracks like a
collection of frenzied grave robbers, their treasure in tow. It was there that they
stood, caked in ash, watching as the train screeched to a stop and dropped its
load of glowing cinders.
