When I was a little girl, I loved for my mom to tell me stories about
herself. No matter how tired she was, she never adumbrated them. She would
fill the tales with the minutest details, and they were always fascinating.
Another thing she did was tell the stories with such grandiloquence! At different
points she would stop and say, “Now what do you think that word means?” I
would try to piece together what was happening in the story and make my best
guess.
To this day, when I want to bug my friends, I use the huge words that I first
learned leaning on Mom's shoulder as she recounted a snippet of her life.
My favorite story was the one about how my mom met my dad:
“I was 17 years old, but I already knew the kind of man I would marry. Take note:
“He would not be too garrulous. I tell you, Rosa, it’s important for a man to make
interesting conversation, but he must also take time to listen to what you have to
say.
“And never impertinent. I’ll never forget when I was 16; a boy from my church
named Joe Turner came and knocked on our door. He didn’t look my momma in
the eye, and didn’t say, ‘Hello.’ He just leaned against the door jamb and said,
‘Rosa here?’
“My momma raised her brow and said, ‘She is, but not for boys such as yourself.’
“But I digress. I’m supposed to be telling you about the day I met your daddy,
right?
“Okay, so I was riding the Amtrak train between Providence and Philadelphia
during my freshman year at Brown, and the door at the end of my car rattled
open.
“He was tall and swarthy. He wore a thick, ivory, cable knit sweater with a gray
wool scarf wrapped firmly around his neck. I couldn’t tell what his heritage was
and that intrigued me. What was he -- Indian, Portuguese, Peruvian?”
Mom would pause here and I would shout, “Cape Verdean!”
She’d continue:
“Well, if I had been shy, I might have just looked out the train window. But then
where would I be now? You wouldn’t even be here! So I let my eyes lock with his as he wobbled down the moving train.
“He smiled a slight smile, not a big one. His eyes raised just enough to let me
know he had spotted me too.”
I always loved this line and would smile at the image of my dad stumbling down
the train and then noticing my radiant mom.
“So Rosa, once we spotted each other, your dad found a number of reasons to
walk past me to go to the café car.
"I was sitting by myself along the aisle. So finally, I just slid over to the window,
leaving the seat next to me empty.
“Your dad came back with two cups of hot cocoa and sat down with a smile. And
we had the most delightful conversation!
“I could tell right then that this was no ephemeral crush – this was the real deal. I
was going to end up loving this man forever.”
And then the part I loved best about the story.
“We pull into the train station in Philadelphia, and it’s time for me to get off. He
was heading on to Washington where he was going to school.
“I prepared myself for some hackneyed expression as I got off the train. You
know, ‘Great meeting you,’ or ‘Good luck at school.’
"I also worried he might try to sneak a smooch, which would have been a big turn
off. We'd just met!
"Instead, he took my hand gently and gave it a little squeeze. He said, ‘If it’s the
thought that counts, consider yourself kissed.’”
Mama said she just about died when he said that! Then she said to herself, “That
man will be my husband.”
And so he is.
