Bathtubs have a very curious history. The bathtub has been in existence for thousands of years.
Given its long history, the modern day bathtub is very different from its predecessors. The bathtub
originated in ancient Rome as a social gathering place. It did not become the private bathtub, common in
American households, until the early 20th century. From its early beginnings in Rome, to cast iron horse
troughs, and eventually to the modern day bathtub, it is clear that the bathtub has had quite an evolution.
The Romans are famous for being one of the first civilizations to bathe. Starting in around 500 BC,
Roman citizens were encouraged to bathe daily in one of the many public bathtubs. The Romans used the
public baths as a place for social events and as a chance to get to know other people. Their public baths were
fairly large and most commonly made of marble. The Romans used lead or bronze pipes to fill the tubs with
water. Contrary to popular belief, the habit of bathing continued after the collapse of the Roman Empire,
and was common throughout the Middle Ages. Bathing eventually went out of fashion at the beginning of
the Renaissance period, only to resurface in the 19th century.
In 1883, the Standard Sanitary Manufacturing Company and the Kohler Company began producing
cast-iron tubs. These companies advertised their tubs as horse troughs –– large tubs where horses could
drink – because this was seen as a more marketable product than a bathtub. However, human bathing in the
tubs became popular due to the easy to clean surface of the tub, and the desire to prevent disease.
One cannot explain the history of bathtubs without mentioning the name Henry L. Mencken. He was
a journalist who infamously wrote a false story regarding the history of bathtubs. In his story, Mencken
wrote that the first bathtub in the United States belonged to Adam Thompson. According to the story, Adam
Thompson put a bathtub in his house in 1842. At a Christmas party, four guests tried the tub, and news of
the bathtub was in the newspaper the next day. Mencken went on to claim that some people were upset
about the news of Thompson’s bathtub because they believed it to be undemocratic. In addition to these, he
fabricated several other details. He wrote that the bathtub was dangerous, and that the Philadelphia
Common Council considered disallowing bathing between November 1 and March 15 of that year for health
reasons. He even wrote that several cities put very high taxes on water for houses that had bathtubs.
Mencken claimed that he did not expect people to believe his newspaper story. However, his story
was reprinted in many newspapers. Shortly afterward, historians also began to spread Mencken’s spurious
story. Eight years after he wrote the false story, Mencken wrote a second story admitting that everything he
had written about bathtubs was false. His story on the bathtub is now considered to be one of the most
famous newspaper hoaxes, or tricks, in history. Even today, some of Mencken’s false information still gets
intermixed with the true history of bathtubs.
Finally, after World War I – and after Mencken’s hoax – many new houses were built in the United
States with indoor plumbing. Previously, most houses in the United States did not have indoor plumbing. In
the early 1920s, only 21% of houses had bathrooms, but by the end of the twentieth century, all new houses
had bathrooms.
Today, there are many different types of bathtubs. Luxury bathtubs are made not only for bathing,
but also for recreation and relaxation. Some homes have hot–tubs, which are also called spas. The hot tub
has a built in heater that keeps the water hot and jets to create bubbles. Some hot tubs even have built–in
sound systems so the bather can listen to music while they relax. There are also tubs made just for the
elderly and disabled. These bathtubs allow people to walk into the tub without having to step over the edge.
It is apparent that, throughout its long history, the bathtub has changed tremendously since its birth
in ancient Rome.
