According to a 2007 statement before the Subcommittee on Horticulture and Organic
Agriculture Committee of the U.S. House of Representatives by May R. Berenbaum, Professor
and Head, Department of Entomology at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
pollination by native bees was recently estimated to be worth 3 billion dollars annually in the
United States. Other sources estimate pollination to be a 15 billion dollar industry worldwide.
Moreover, approximately 3/4 of the 250,000 + species of flowering plants rely on their insect
partners – pollinators – for the vital natural process which transfers pollen grains to receptive
female plants to effect fertilization.
 However, up to 80% of honeybees in 35 states have suddenly, inexplicably vanished,
baffling entomologists, beekeepers, farmers, and governments. About 10% of 2.4 million hives
disappeared in the U.S. in late 2006 and early 2007 in an enigmatic calamity that has been named
“colony collapse disorder,” or CCD. This mysterious killer has wiped out hives in the U.S. and
overseas – in Italy, Poland, Portugal, Central, South America, and Croatia. Some have theorized
that cell phones disrupt the ability of the insects to navigate – the bees leave the hive, never to
return. Others have surmised that a bee virus corresponding to HIV in humans has somehow
inculcated itself into the honeybee population. Still others have laid the blame on pesticides,
most notably a neurotoxin called imidacloprid – IMD, which has been shown by French
researchers to cause disorientation among honeybees. IMD also affects the ability of bees to
forage, affecting hive activity. While most French and some American beekeepers consider IMD
to be a major suspect in CCD, their opinion is not corroborated by American researchers. U.S.
scientists continue to pursue the cause, or amalgam of causes, of the disorder. On September 7,
2007, American researchers reported in the journal Science that a newly discovered virus, the
Israeli acute paralysis virus, may be a suspect in the catastrophic loss of honeybees. Meanwhile,
U.S. beekeepers are urgently requesting expeditious resolution to the crisis in the form of
emergency research funding.
The impact of CCD is almost unfathomable. One–third of all food is provided by the
pollination of honeybees. In a world without honeybees, there would be almost no fruits or
vegetables, except for those hand–pollinated by humans. At their current rate of disappearance,
honeybees will cease to exist by the year 2035. 

