The Columbian Exchange was the “exchange of plants, animals, foods, human
populations (including slaves) communicable diseases, and ideas between the Eastern and
Western hemispheres that occurred after 1492,” according to Wikipedia. The term “Columbian
Exchange,” coined in 1972 by historian Alfred Crosby, took hold and became not only standard
shorthand for the phenomenon which it exemplified, but also a perspective for witnessing
societal and ecological events.
When Christopher Columbus made landfall with his crew in the Bahamas in October
1492, two worlds with separate evolutionary histories met. When Europeans began to settle
America’s east coast, they brought with them and cultivated familiar crops – wheat and apples –
as well as familiar weeds, such as dandelion and chickweed. In the 1600s, they introduced cattle
and horses, which flourished in the New World climate.
Devastating diseases were introduced to the American population which had no
resistance to them. John R. McNeill, professor of history at Georgetown University, points out
that “when the first inhabitants of the Americas arrived across the Bering land bridge between
20,000 and 12,000 years ago, they brought few diseases with them … they had no domesticated
animals, the original source of human diseases such as smallpox and measles. In addition, as they
passed from Siberia to North America, the first Americans had spent many years in extreme
cold, which eliminated many of the disease-causing agents that might have traveled with them.”
Consequently, between 1492 and 1650, over 90% of the Native American population died in
epidemic after epidemic of smallpox, measles, mumps, whooping cough, influenza, chicken pox,
and typhus. The loss of labor caused by pathogens indirectly led to the establishment of African
slavery among European immigrants in the Americas, resulting in the importation of malaria and
yellow fever from Africa, causing even more destruction of the Native American population.
The export of American flora and fauna did not revolutionize the Old World as the influx
of European agriculture altered the New World ecosystem. According to Crosby, “the New
World’s great contribution to the Old is in crop plants. … Maize, white potatoes, sweet potatoes,
various squashes, chiles, and manioc” augmented and invigorated the European cuisine. Very
few New World creatures traversed the ocean –– the muskrat, the gray squirrel, and a few others,
but they did not precipitate large scale changes in Old World ecosystems.
Although some diseases made the ocean voyage from New World to Old, they did not
have appreciable effects on the European population. Crosby stated that, although some deaths
were attributed to ailments from America, “the total is insignificant compared to Native
American losses to smallpox alone.”
 In Crosby’s original work, he eschewed ideological statements. He reminded his readers
that neither the Old nor New World was inferior or superior to the other; the encounter between
two worlds was fundamentally an exchange. By 1988, he summarized his long view of the
encounter in this way: “My point is … that the impact of the Encounter is so massive that we
should consider it with the same sense of scale as we do events connected with the endings and
beginnings of the geological periods and eras and their influence on the direction of evolution on
the planet.” 

