Ethanol (CH3CH2OH; which is also called ethyl alcohol, grain alcohol, and EtOH) is a
clear, colorless liquid. It is a renewable biofuel made from starch and sugar–based crops like
corn grain and sugar cane or from cellulosic feedstocks like grass, wood, or recycled
newspapers. Ethanol is a high–octane biofuel which performs so splendidly in internal
combustion engines that early automakers presumed it would be the world’s chief fuel.
American proponents of ethanol fuel highlight two principal advantages: its
environmental impact and its energy security benefits.
The adoption of ethanol reduces noxious emissions such as carbon monoxide (CO) and
pollutants from internal combustion engines; hence, it is appreciably less deleterious to the
environment than gasoline. Ethanol made from corn has been shown to reduce harmful emissions
by up to 13%, whereas ethanol made from cellulosic materials reduces dangerous emissions by
as much as 88%.
Ethanol is a renewable biofuel; in only six months a new crop can be grown, harvested,
and converted to fuel, so it is profitable for rural crop–producing economies. In addition, it keeps
engines clean and can be used in gasoline engines with no modifications when combining gas
with up to 10% ethanol. It can be used in specially modified vehicles called “flexible–fuel” or
“flex–fuel” vehicles in concentrations of up to 85%. Gasoline combined with 85% ethanol is
generally referred to as “E85.” Higher ratios of ethanol in the fuel mixture result in less reliance
on fossil fuels, so there is less dependence on imports.
American opponents of ethanol fuel point to three disadvantages: its price fluctuations, its
energy level, and its availability.
The price of ethanol fluctuates on a different cycle than gasoline; therefore, at times
ethanol is more expensive than gasoline, and at times it is cheaper. Another drawback of ethanol
is that it contains less energy per gallon than gasoline; even when it is cheaper per gallon than
conventional fuel, it does not take the vehicle as far as a gallon of gas. A car’s fuel economy with
ethanol can be expected to be 20–30% less than a vehicle which burns gasoline. So the
occasional cheaper price is offset by the lower energy yields. In addition, ethanol is not as widely
distributed as gasoline. It is readily available only in the Midwest; other areas have limited
ethanol infrastructure.
The Obama administration is working on expanding the ethanol infrastructure. In a recent
interview with 15 newspaper editors, President Obama characterized the U.S. position on
biofuels in this way: “Our challenge, I think, is to see our current ethanol technology as a bridge
to the biofuels technologies of the future. And that’s what we want to invest in, and that’s what
I’ll be directing my Department of Agriculture to focus on.” 

