Authors William Strauss and Neil Howe are known for their theories about cycles of
generations in American history. In their seminal Generations, and the subsequent 13th Gen, and
The Fourth Turning, they explore the history of America from 1584 to the present as a repeating
cycle of 4 consecutive generational archetypes. They refer to each cycle of four generations as a
constellation, and they posit that each constellational era corresponds to “recurring types of
historical events” and moods. They state that adjacent generations do not live similar lives, and
that each generation ages as a singular cohort as time moves forward. If one were to place this
progression on a graph, the line would form a diagonal – which Strauss and Howe call the
“generational diagonal.” According to Strauss and Howe, each generation is comprised of people
who possess 1) common age, 2) common beliefs, and 3) perceived membership in the same
generation. A generation is approximately 22 years in length. Since a lifetime may reach 80–90
years, members of 4 generations are alive at one time.
The four generational archetypes identified by Strauss and Howe are Idealist, Reactive,
Civic, and Adaptive. Idealists are “increasingly indulged youths after a secular crisis,” come of
age “inspiring a spiritual awakening,” cultivate principle rather than practicality or pragmatism
in midlife, and emerge as “visionary elders.” Reactives grow up “underprotected and criticized
youths during a spiritual awakening,” mature into risk taking adults, unlike the preceding
generation at midlife, mellow into “pragmatic midlife leaders during a secular crisis,” and
become reclusive elders. Civics grow up “increasingly protected youths after a spiritual
awakening,” become “a heroic and achieving cadre of young adults,” build institutions as
midlifers, and “emerge as busy midlifers, attacked by the next spiritual awakening.” Adaptives
grow up as “overprotected and suffocated youths during a secular crisis,” unlike the previous
generation as young adults, become “risk–averse, conformist rising adults,” mature into
“indecisive arbitrator leaders during a spiritual awakening,” and become sensitive elders.
The authors believe that the archetypical generations have recurred in fixed order
throughout American history with one exception: following the Civil War, one type did not
appear. As each generational archetype shifts from one phase of life to the next, the succeeding
generations line up in a predictably recurring pattern. For example, when the Idealists are elders,
the Reactives are in midlife, the Civics are in rising adulthood, and the Adaptives are in youth.
The central role of the elders, aged 66–87, is that of stewardship, such as supervising and
mentoring. The central role of midlife, aged 44–65, is leadership, such as parenting and teaching.
The central role of rising adulthood is activity, such as working and starting families. The central
role of youth, aged 0 to 21 is dependence, such as growing and learning. 

