Under my desk I keep a large carton of cassette tapes. Though they have all been transcribed, I still like to listen to them from time to time.
Some are quiet and easily understood. They are filled with the voices of American doctors, interrupted occasionally by the clink of a coffee cup or beep of a pager. The rest - more than half of them - are very noisy, They are filled with the voices of the Lees family, Hinong refugees from Laos who came to the United States in 1980. Against a background of babies crying, children playing, doors slamming, dishes clattering, a television yammering, and an air conditioner wheezing, I can hear the mothers voice, by turns breathy, nasal, gargly, or humlike as it slides up and down the Hmong languages eight tones; the fathers voice, louder, slower, more vehement; and my interpreters voice, mediating in Hmong and English, low and deferential in each. The hubbub summons sense memories: the coolness of the red metal folding chair, reserved for guests, that was always set up when I arrived in the apartment; the shadows cast by the amulet that hung from the ceiling and swung in the breeze on its length of grocers twine; the tastes of Hmong food.
I sat on the Lees’ red chair for the first time on May 19, 1988. Earlier that spring I had come to Merced, California, because I had heard that there were some misunderstandings at the county hospital between its Hmong patients and medical staff. One doctor called them collisions, which made it sound as if two different kinds of people had rammed into each other, head on, to the accompaniment of squealing brakes and breaking glass, As it turned out, the encounters were messy but rarely frontal. Both sides were wounded, but neither side seemed to know what had hit it or how to avoid another crash,
I have always felt that the action most worth watching occurs not at the center of things but where edges meet. I like shorelines, weather fronts, international borders. These places have interesting frictions and incongruities, and often, if you stand at the point of tangency, you can see both sides better than if you were in the middle of either one. This is especially true when the apposition is cultural, When I first came to Merced, I hoped that the culture of American medicine, about which I knew a little, and the culture of the Hmong, about which I knew nothing, would somehow illuminate each other if I could position myself between the two and manage not to get caught in the crossfire. But after getting to know the Lees family and their daughter’s doctors and realizing how hard it was to blame anyone, I stopped analyzing the situation in such linear terms. Now, when I play the tapes late at night, I imagine what they would sound like if I could splice them together, so the voices of the Hmong and those of the American doctors could be heard on a single tape, speaking a common language.
