For the qualities that distinguish great conductors lie far beyond and above what we have spoken of.
We now begin to deal with the intangibles, the deep magical aspect of conducting.
It is the mystery of relationships—conductor and orchestra bound together by the tiny but powerful split second.
How can I describe to you the magic of the moment of beginning a piece of music?
There is only one possible fraction of a second that feels exactly right for starting.
There is a wait while the orchestra readies itself and collects its powers; while the conductor concentrates his whole will and force toward the work in hand; while the audience quiets down, and the last cough has died away.
There is no slight rustle of a program book; the instruments are poised and—bang!
That’s it.
One second later, it is too late, and the magic has vanished.
This psychological timing is constantly in play throughout the performance of music.
It means that a great conductor is one who has great sensitivity to the flow of time; who makes one note move to the next in exactly the right way and at the right instant.
For music, as we said, exists in the medium of time.
It is time itself that must be carved up, molded and remolded until it becomes, like a statue, an existing shape and form.
This is the hardest to do.
For a symphony is not like a statue, which can be viewed all at once, or bit by bit at leisure, in one’s own chosen time.
With music, we are trapped in time.
Each note is gone as soon as it has sounded, and it never can be recontemplated or heard again at the particular instant of rightness.
It is always too late for a second look.
So the conductor is a kind of sculptor whose element is time instead of marble; and in sculpting it, he must have a superior sense of proportion and relationship.
He must judge the largest rhythms, the whole phraseology of a work.
He must conquer the form of a piece not only in the sense of form as a mold, but form in its deepest sense, knowing and controlling where the music relaxes, where it begins to accumulate tension, where the greatest tension is reached, where it must ease up to gather strength for the next lap, where it unloads that strength.
These are the intangibles of conducting, the mysteries that no conductor can learn or acquire.
If he has a natural faculty for deep perception, it will increase and deepen as he matures.
If he hasn’t, he will always be a pretty good conductor.
But even the pretty good conductor must have one more attribute in his personality, without which all the mechanics and knowledge and perception are useless; and that is the power to communicate all this to his orchestra—through his arms, face, eyes, fingers, and whatever vibrations may flow from him.
If he uses a baton, the baton itself must be a living thing, charged with a kind of electricity, which makes it an instrument of meaning in its tiniest movement.
If he does not use a baton, his hands must do the job with equal clarity.
But baton or no baton, his gestures must be first and always meaningful in terms of the music.
The chief element in the conductor’s technique of communication is the preparation.
Everything must be shown to the orchestra before it happens.
Once the player is playing the note, it is too late.
So the conductor always has to be a beat or two ahead of the orchestra . . . .
And he must hear two things at the same time: what the players are doing at any moment, and what they are about to do a moment later.
Therefore, the basic trick is in the preparatory upbeat.
If our conductor is back again on page one of Brahms’s First Symphony, he must show, in his silent upbeat, the character of the music which is about to sound.
Whether he thinks of it as tense and agitated, or weighty and doom-ridden, his upbeat should show this, in order to enable the orchestra players to respond in kind.
It is exactly like breathing: the preparation is like an inhalation, and the music sounds as an exhalation.
We all have to inhale in order to speak, for example; all verbal expression is exhaled.
So it is with music: we inhale on the upbeat and sing out a phrase of music, then inhale again and breathe out the next phrase.
A conductor who breathes with the music has gone far in acquiring a technique.
But the conductor must not only make his orchestra play; he must make them want to play.
He must exalt them, lift them, start their adrenaline pouring, either through cajoling or demanding or raging.
But however he does it, he must make the orchestra love the music as he loves it.
It is not so much imposing his will on them like a dictator; it is more like projecting his feelings around him so that they reach the last player in the second violin section.
And when this happens—when one hundred players share his feelings, exactly, simultaneously, responding as one to each rise and fall of the music, to each point of arrival and departure, to each little inner pulse—then there is a human identity of feeling that has no equal elsewhere.
It is the closest thing I know to love itself.
On this current of love the conductor can communicate at the deepest levels with his players, and ultimately with his audience.
He may shout and rant and curse and insult his players at rehearsal—as some of our greatest conductors are famous for doing—but if there is this love, the conductor and his orchestra will remain knit together through it all and function as one.
Well, there is our ideal conductor.
And perhaps the chief requirement of all this is that he be humble before the composer; that he never interpose himself between the music and the audience; that all his efforts, however strenuous or glamorous, be made in the service of the composer’s meaning—the music itself, which, after all, is the whole reason for the conductor’s existence.
###
In line 21, “mold” most nearly means
decaying surface
fixed pattern
decorative strip
organic growth
cooking utensil
1
