After 50 years of life and 20 years of death, the great Adler and Sullivan Auditorium in Chicago is back in business again.
Orchestra Hall, also in Chicago, was beautifully spruced up for its sixty-eighth birthday.
In St. Louis, a 1925 movie palace has been successfully transformed into Powell Symphony Hall, complete with handsome bar from New Yorks demolished Metropolitan Орега Ноuse.
Sentimentalism? Hardly.
This is no more than a practical coming of cultural age, a belated recognition that fine old buildings frequently offer the most for the money in an assortment of values, including cost, and above all, that new cultural centers do not a culture make.
It indicates the dawning of certain sensibilities, perspectives, and standards without which arts programs are mockeries of everything the arts stand for.
The last decade has seen city after city rush pell-mell into the promotion of great gobs of cultural real estate.
It has seen a few good new theaters and a lot of bad ones, temples to bourgeois muses with all the panache of suburban shopping centers.
The practice has been to treat the arts in chamber-of-commerce, rather than in creative, terms.
That is just as tragic as it sounds.
The trend toward preservation is significant not only because it is saving and restoring some superior buildings that are testimonials to the creative achievements of other times, but also because it is bucking the conventional wisdom of the conventional power structure that provides the backing for conventional cultural centers to house the arts.
That wisdom, as it comes true blue from the hearts and minds of real estate dealers and investment bankers, is that you don't keep old buildings; they are obsolete.
Anything new is better than anything old and anything big is better than anything small, and if a few cultural values are lost along the way, it is not too large a price to pay.
In addition, the new, big buildings must be all in one place so they will show.
They’ll not only serve the arts, they’ll improve the surrounding property values.
Build now, and fill them later, At the same time, tear down the past, rip out cultural roots, erase tradition, rub out the architectural evidence that the arts flowered earlier in our cities and enriched them and that this enrichment is culture.
Substitute a safe and sanitary status symbol for the loss, Put up the shiny mediocrities of the present and demolish the shabby masterpieces of the past.
That is the ironic other side of the “cultural explosion” coin.
In drama, and in life, irony and tragedy go hand in hand.
Chicago’s Auditorium is such a masterpiece.
With its glowing, golden ambiance, its soaring arches and super-stage from which whispers can be heard in the far reaches of the theater, it became a legend in its own time.
One of the great nineteenth-century works of Louis Sullivan and Dankmar Adler and an anchor point of modern architectural history, it has been an acknowledged model of acoustical and aesthetic excellence.
(Interestingly, the Auditorium is a hard theater in which to install microphones today, and many modern performers, untrained in balance and projection and reliant on technical mixing of sound, find it hard to function in a near-perfect house.) Until October 1967, the last performance at the Auditorium was of Hellzapoppinin’ in 1941, and the last use of the great stage was for bowling alleys during the Second World War.
Closed after that, it settled into decay for the next 20 years, Falling plaster filled the hall, and the golden ceiling was partly ruined by broken roof drains, Last fall the Auditorium reopened, not quite in its old glory, but close to it.
The splendors of the house were traced in the eight-candlepower glory of carbon-filament lightbulbs of the same kind used in 1889 when the theater, and electricity, were new.
Their gentle brilliance picked out restored architectural features in warm gilt and umber.
We have never had greater technical means or expertise to make our landmarks bloom.
The question is no longer whether we can bring old theaters back to new brilliance, but whether we can fill them when they’re done.
As with the new centers, that will be the acid cultural test.
###
On the basis of information provided in the rest of the passage, the word 'death' (line 1) best conveys
flagging attendance
wartime malaise
demolition
neglect
disrepute
3