Given all the brouhaha, you’d think it was crystal clear why cloning human beings is unethical.
But what exactly is wrong with it?
What would a clone be?
Well, he or she would be a complete human being who happens to share the same genes with another person.
Today, we call such people identical twins.
To my knowledge no one has argued that twins are immoral.
“You should treat all clones like you would treat all monozygous [identical] twins or triplets,” concludes Dr. H. Tristam Engelhardt, a professor of medicine at Baylor and a philosopher at Rice University.
“That’s it.”
It would be unethical to treat a human clone as anything other than a human being.
Some argue that the existence of clones would undermine the uniqueness of each human being.
“Can individuality, identity, and dignity be severed from genetic distinctiveness, and from belief in a person’s open future?” asks political thinker George Will.
Will and others have fallen under the sway of what one might call “genetic essentialism,” the belief that genes almost completely determine who a person is.
But a person who is a clone would live in a very different world from that of his or her genetic predecessor.
With greatly divergent experiences, their brains would be wired differently.
After all, even twins who grow up together are separate people—distinct individuals with different personalities and certainly no lack of Will’s “individuality, identity, and dignity.”
But what about cloning exceptional human beings?
George Will put it this way: “Suppose a clone of basketball star Michael Jordan, age 8, preferred violin to basketball?
Is it imaginable?
If so, would it be tolerable to the cloner?”
Yes, it is imaginable, and the cloner would just have to put up with violin recitals.
Kids are not commercial property.
Overzealous parents regularly push their children into sports, music, and dance lessons, but given the stubborn nature of individuals, those parents rarely manage to make kids stick forever to something they hate.
A ban on cloning wouldn’t abolish pushy parents.
###
In line 11, “open” most nearly means
overt
frank
unrestricted
unprotected
public
2
