He was good-looking, in a Southern, romantic poet sort of way.
He needed those good looks, one of the aunts said; why else would my otherwise sensible mother have married a man like him, an actor-writer hyphenate who lived on dreams and spent his free evenings carrying a spear at the Opera House.
But that was in later times, when he had moved out of the rundown communal house in the Berkeley Hills, leaving my mother and the ever-changing cast of nominal uncles and aunts to patch the ancient water heater and pump out the basement when the overpressured valve finally blew.
He needed separateness to write, he said, solitude, something we’d never given him, and he was tired, tired of being dragged from his study to tend to the latest household eruption that bubbled up “like gas from a Calistoga mud bath,” he said, with relentless regularity.
He looked tired by then, as tired of us as we were of him, of forgotten birthdays and surprises that failed to surprise.
When he did bring us a present, I even wondered why, for it was always somehow off: last season’s hot toy no one played with any more, or a complicated model no boy could assemble without a father’s help.
Which we never got.
He was an actor, after all, not tech crew, an artist, not someone who could fix a toy.
If he was an actor, we were props at best.
Reluctant ones—had there been a Plantagenet Pleasure Faire, he would have strutted his hour as Wicked Dick III, while Geoffrey and I, thrust into burlap sacks, were hauled off, two little princes in shabby tights, to be disposed of elsewhere.
That was his glory, kinging it.
Living History, he called it, and in the early days he followed the fairs up and down the state, living the Renaissance first in Agoura, then in Marin, finally winding up the acting season with Victoria’s England in San Francisco or even Oakland for one or two slow years.
Not that anyone ever hired him to act the king.
No, he was a minor figure even on that rude stage, a charming but lesser nobleman in Elizabeth’s court, an attentive councilor in Victoria’s entourage.
But he shared the perks of royalty, such as they were, stood center stage in black velvet pantaloons while the September sun burned overhead, or posed handsomely (in a Prince Albert coat, no less) as the royal party made its way through the Christmas crowds at Dickens Fair.
Why he stuck to it, I never understood.
Certainly not for the pay.
Between fairs he wrote, or thought of writing, shut up in his study, into which we children were not allowed, or did research for his one-man-shows (in which he played a series of writers, one per show, so that one year we saw his Edgar Allan Poe, another year, his Ambrose Bierce).
He was a writer, or at least a writer once removed, writing down other men’s words and speaking them as if they were his own.
At times it seemed he thought they were his own, he paraphrased them so freely, vamping upon the themes of The Devil’s Dictionary.
And he probably thought we were his own as well, as little acquainted with us as he was.
And so we were, if only by example and heredity.
###
In line 14, “rude” most nearly means
roughly made
deliberately impolite
highly vigorous
inconsiderate
tempestuous
0
