Grown people know that they do not always know the why of things, and even if they think they know, they do not know where and how they got the proof.
Hence the irritation they show when children keep on demanding to know if a thing is so and how the grown folks got the proof of it.
It is so troublesome because it is disturbing to the pigeonhole way of life.
It is upsetting because until the elders are pushed for an answer, they have never looked to see if it was so, nor how they came by what passes for proof to their acceptances of certain things as true.
So, if telling their questioning young to run off and play does not suffice for an answer, a good swat on the child’s bottom is held to be proof positive for anything from spelling “Constantinople” to why the sea is salt.
It was told to the old folks and that had been enough for them, or to put it in Black idiom, nobody didn’t tell ‘em, but they heard.
So there must be something wrong with a child that questions the gods of the pigeonhole.
I was always asking and making myself a crow in a pigeon’s nest.
It was hard on my family and surroundings, and they in turn were hard on me.
I did not know then, as I know now, that people are prone to build a statue of the kind of person that it pleases them to be.
And few people want to be forced to ask themselves, “What if there is no me like my statue?”
The thing to do is to grab the broom of anger and drive off the beast of fear.
I was full of curiosity like many other children, and like them I was as unconscious of the sanctity of statuary as a flock of pigeons around a palace.
I got few answers from other people, but I kept on asking, because I couldn’t do anything else with my feelings.
Naturally, I felt like other children in that death, destruction, and other agonies were never meant to touch me.
Things like that happened to other people, and no wonder.
They were not like me and mine.
Naturally, the world and the firmaments careened to one side a little so as not to inconvenience me.
In fact, the universe went further than that—it was happy to break a few rules just to show me preferences.
For instance, for a long time I gloated over the happy secret that when I played outdoors in the moonlight the moon followed me, whichever way I ran.
The moon was so happy when I came out to play that it ran shining and shouting after me like a pretty puppy dog.
The other children didn’t count.
But, I was rudely shaken out of this when I confided my happy secret to Carrie Roberts, my chum.
It was cruel.
She not only scorned my claim, she said that the moon was paying me no mind at all.
The moon, my own happy privateplaying moon, was out in its play yard to race and play with her.
We disputed the matter with hot jealousy, and nothing would do but we must run a race to prove which one the moon was loving.
First, we both ran a race side by side, but that proved nothing because we both contended that the moon was going that way on account of us.
I just knew that the moon was there to be with me, but Carrie kept on saying that it was herself that the moon preferred.
So then it came to me that we ought to run in opposite directions so that Carrie could come to her senses and realize the moon was mine.
So we both stood with our backs to our gate, counted three, and tore out in opposite directions.
“Look! Look, Carrie!” I cried exultantly.
“You see the moon is following me!”
“Ah, youse a tale-teller! You know it’s chasing me.”
So Carrie and I parted company, mad as we could be with each other.
When the other children found out what the quarrel was about, they laughed it off.
They told me the moon always followed them.
The unfaithfulness of the moon hurt me deeply.
My moon followed Carrie Roberts.
My moon followed Matilda Clark and Julia Mosley, and Oscar and Teedy Miller.
But after a while, I ceased to ache over the moon’s many loves.
I found comfort in the fact that though I was not the moon’s exclusive friend, I was still among those who showed the moon which way to go.
That was my earliest conscious hint that the world didn’t tilt under my footfalls, nor careen over one-sided just to make me glad.
But no matter whether my probings made me happier or sadder, I kept on probing to know.
###
In line 15, “touch” most nearly means
affect
rival
transfer
press
tap
0
###
In line 27, “hot” most nearly means
lucky
spicy
ardent
extremely warm
electrically charged
2
