I have yet to meet a poetry-lover under thirty who was not an introvert, or an introvert who was not unhappy in adolescence.
At school, particularly, maybe, if, as in my own case, it is a boarding school, he sees the extrovert successful, happy, and good and himself unpopular or neglected; and what is hardest to bear is not unpopularity, but the consciousness that it is deserved, that he is grubby and inferior and frightened and dull.
Knowing no other kind of society than the contingent, he imagines that this arrangement is part of the eternal scheme of things, that he is doomed to a life of failure and envy.
It is not till he grows up, till years later he runs across the heroes of his school days and finds them grown commonplace and sterile, that he realizes that the introvert is the lucky one, the best adapted to an industrial civilization the collective values of which are so infantile that he alone can grow, who has educated his fantasies and learned how to draw upon the resources of his inner life.
At the time, however, his adolescence is unpleasant enough.
Unable to imagine a society in which he would feel at home, he turns away from the human to the nonhuman: homesick he will seek, not his mother, but mountains or autumn woods, and the growing life within him will express itself in a devotion to music and thoughts upon mutability and death.
Art for him will be something infinitely precious, pessimistic, and hostile to life.
If it speaks of love it must be love frustrated, for all success seems to him noisy and vulgar; if it moralizes, it must counsel a stoic resignation, for the world he knows is well content with itself and will not change.
Deep as first love and wild with all regret,
O death in life, the days that are no more.
Now more than ever seems it sweet to die
To cease upon the midnight with no pain.
That to the adolescent is the authentic poetic note and whoever is the first in his life to strike it, whether Tennyson, Keats, Swinburne, Housman or another, awakens a passion of imitation and an affectation which no subsequent refinement or sophistication of his taste can entirely destroy.
In my own case it was Hardy in the summer of 1923; for more than a year I read no one else and I do not think that I was ever without one volume or another or the beautifully produced Wessex edition in my hands: I smuggled them into class, carried them about on Sunday walks, and took them up to the dormitory to read in the early morning,  though they were far too unwieldy to be read in bed with comfort.
In the autumn of 1924 there was a palace revolution after which he had to share his kingdom with Edward Thomas, until finally they were both defeated by Elliot at the battle of Oxford in 1926.
Besides serving as the archetype of the Poetic, Hardy was also an expression of the contemporary scene.
He was both my Keats and my Sandburg.
To begin with, he looked like my father: that broad unpampered moustache, bald forehead, and deeply lined sympathetic face belonged to that other world of feeling and sensation.
Here was a writer whose emotions, if sometimes monotonous and sentimental in expression, would be deeper and more faithful than my own, and whose attachment to the earth would be more secure and observant.
###
The word ‘contingent’ (line 3) most nearly means
juvenile 
scholarly 
competitive 
immediate 
intelligent
3
