Why is the Mona Lisa the best-known painting in the entire world? A small glimpse at even some of its subjects features -- her eyes, or perhaps just her hands -- brings instant recognition even to those who have no taste or passion for painting.
Art historians, poets, and admirers have tried to explain the commanding place that the Mona Lisa has in our cultural life with reference to qualities intrinsic to the work.
There is something, they argue, inside the painting that speaks to us all, that unleashes feelings, emotion, and recognition.
This idea originated at the beginning of the nineteenth century, though it had precedents.
It is still the position of many art critics.
Art historian Kenneth Clarke, for example, writing in 1973, could not accept that the Mona Lisa was famous for reasons other than its inner qualities.
There are millions of people, he explained, who know the name of only one picture -- the Mona Lisa.
This, he argues, is not simply due to an accident of accumulated publicity.
It means that this strange image strikes at the subconscious with a force that is extremely rare in an individual work of art.
Clarke's conception of art history is now regarded as somewhat old-fashioned.
This is not the case with the "postmodern" Paul Barolsky, who in 1994, seeking to explain what it is about the Mona Lisa that "holds us in thrall,"" pointed to Leonardo's remarkable technique, which creates a sense of texture and depth.
The painter, he added, yendered the "inwardness of the sitter, the sense... of her mind or soul.”
I think one should avoid succumbing to the charm of a myth, to the idea that inside every masterpiece that has remained alive for centuries something imponderable speaks to us.
It is of course intensely pleasurable to imagine that, as we face the products of Leonardo, Raphael, and other great artists of bygone ages, armed with nothing but our innate sensibility, a mysterious yet almost palpable contact is established.
But like most historians, start with the assumption that the renown of a masterpiece rests on a sequence of events and historical agencies (people, institutions, processes) working in a largely unplanned manner for different ends.
Such forces have turned the Mona Lisa into the best-known painting in the world. Whether the Mona Lisa deserves this position is a judgment I happily leave to the reader.
###
In line 5, "position" most nearly means
rank
role
policy
view
location
3