New York was darker than I expected, and, in spite of the cleansing rain, dirtier.
Used to teh sensual curves of Puerto Rico, my eyes had to adjust to the regular, aggressive two-dimensionality of Brooklyn.
Raindrops pounded the hard streets, captured the dim silver flow of street lamps, bounced against sidewalks in glistening sparks, then disappeared like tiny ephemeral jewels, into the darkness.
Mother and grandmother teased that I was disillusioned because the streets were not paved with gold.
But I had no such vision of New York.
I was disappointed by the darkness and fixed my hopes on the promise of light deep within the sparkling raindrops.
Two days later, I leaneda gainst the wall of our apartment building on McKibbin Street wondering where New York ended and the rest of the world began.
It was hard to tell.
There was no horizon in Brooklyn.
Everwhere I looked, my eyes met a vertical maze of gray and brown straight-edged buildings with sharp corners and deep shadows.
Every few blocks there was a cement playground surrounded by chain-link fence.
And in between, weedy lots mounded with garbage and rusting cars.
A girl came out of the building next door, a jump rope in her hand.
She appraised me shyly; I pretended to ignore her.
She teppoed on the rop, stretching the ends overhead as if to measure their length, and then began to skip, slowly, grunting each time she came down on the sidewalk.
Swich splat gruns wish, she turned her back to me; swish splat grunt swish, she faced me again and smiled.
I smiled back, and she hopped over.
"Tu eres hispana?" she asked, as she whirled the rope in lazy arcs.
No, I am Puerto Rican."
"Same thing. Puerto Rican, Hispanic. That is what we are here."
She skipped a tight circle, stopped abruptly, and shoved the rope in my direction.
"Want a turn?"
"Sure."
I hopped on one leg, then the other.
"So, if you are Puerto Rican, they call you Hispanic?"
"Yeah. Anybody who speaks Spanish."
I jumped a circle, as she had done, but faster.
"You mean, if you speak Spanish, you are Hispanic?"
"Well, yeah. No... I mean your parents have to be Puerto Rican or Cuban or something."
I whirled the rope to the right, then the left, like a boxer.
"Okay, your parents are Cuban, let's say and you're born here, but you don't speak Spanish. Are you Hispanic?"
She bit her lower lip.
"I guess so," she finally said.
"It has to do with being from a Spanish country. I mean, you or your parents, like, even if you don't speak Spanish, you're Hispanic, you know?"
She looked at me uncertainly.
I nodded and returned her rope.
But I didn't know.
I'd always been Ouerto Rican, and it hadn't ocurred to me that in Brooklyn I'd be someone else.
Later, I asked, "Are we Hispanics, Mother?"
"Yes, because we speak Spanish."
"But a girl said you don't have to speak the language to be Hispanic."
She scrunchered her eyes.
"What girl? Where did you meet a girl?"
"Outside. She lives in the next building."
"Who said you could go out to the sidewalk? This isn't Puerto Rico. Algo te puede suceder."
"Something could happen to you" was a variety of dangers outside the locked doors of our apartment.
I listened to mother's lecture with downcast eyes and the necessary, respectful expression of humility.
But inside, I quaked.
Tow days in New York, and I'd already become someone else.
It wasn't hard to imagine greater dangers lay ahead.
###
In line 2, "regular" most nearly means
customary
agreeable
unvarying
recurring
average
2